KMV模型加計預期虧損的信用風險評等
Credit Risk Rating of KMV Model Adjusted for Expected Loss
信用風險、KMV模型、EWMA、預期虧損
本論文是使用Moody’s的KMV模型為基礎，且在估計股價波動性時，我們使用JP Morgan的股價波動性理論，已反應最新的股價波動性。我們又從KMV模型在實務上應用得知，當使用KMV模型進行預測時，發現預測上會出現許多的問題。比如說，一些已經發生財務危機的公司，經過重整後，公司並沒有負債，以KMV模型來看應無信用風險，但市場上信用評等機構給予的評等仍為高信用風險，產生很不一致的問題。於是，我們想說，應該將公司的營運狀況納入KMV模型考量。而且，Black-Scholes模型的原始假設是用在市場上的選擇權，因其可以建構一個無風險的套利投資組合，故Black-Scholes模型是可以使用風險中性的方式，只需要變異數丟進去即可，不需要考慮到預期報酬。可是對於預測公司的違約機率來說，並不能使用風險中性的模式，必須對公司將來是獲利或是虧損的狀況進行預測。故若只使用Black-Scholes的風險中立的預測方式，便會產生偏差。故本論文採用非風險中性的方式做預測，即除了考慮公司價值變動外，也必須考慮其公司營運的方向。我們將當公司產生連續虧損時，對公司未來營運會產生不良影響，而求出其虧損的趨勢，估出預期虧損，並對公司違約距離進行調整，期望發現比原始KMV模型，更反映真實違約狀況的模型。本研究有以下結論：1、以指數權重移動平均計算之衰退因子為0.928311959，2、以群內分析法來分析兩個模型，發現加計預期虧損的KMV較KMV模型，對於公司財務危機具有較強的預測能力。3、繪出檢定力曲線（ROC）後發現發現加計預期虧損的KMV較KMV模型，對於公司財務危機具有更高的檢定力。4、發現在加計預期虧損的KMV模型中的違約距離與違約機率，預期虧損更容易反應在高信用風險的公司。5、發現加計預期虧損的KMV模型對TEJ信評有較高的解釋能力。
This thesis is based on Moody’s KMV model. To calculate the volatility of stock returns, we use the exponential weighted moving average model（EWMA）to capture the dynamic feature of volatility with the latest observation carrying the highest weight.  In practical applications, we find a major problem with respect to the KMV model. We should incorporate the expected operating results of companies in the KMV model, in particular, the downside risk. In theory, the most critical assumption of the Black-Scholes model is that it is applied to options in the financial market and thus, a riskless, arbitrage-free portfolio can be constructed. That is, the model provides a risk-neutral solution without having to considering the risk premium or the expected return of the stock. However, when the model is applied to predict corporation default probabilities, the setting is less likely to be risk-neutral and may have to take the expected operating results of corporations into consideration. This thesis adopts a non risk-neutral modification with a simplifying assumption that the company’s operating result will remain negative when it suffered two consecutive annual operating losses. Then, we calculate the trend of losses to estimate the expected loss by adding it to the total borrowing and re-estimate the default distance.  The major results are as follows. First, the parameter of the exponentially weighted moving average model, the decay factor, is 0.928311959. Second, we use Cluster Analysis to analyze the power of these two models. We find that KMV model adjusted for expected loss improves significantly over the original model. Third, we draw the ROC curve and find the same result as Cluster Analysis. Fourth, we find that incorporating the effect of expected loss is essential for the group of high credit risk corporations. Finally, the KMV model adjusted for expected loss has higher explanatory power than the KMV model with respect to TEJ credit risk ratings.
