SOA架構在供應鏈系統系統規劃發展模式之應用研究-以Q公司為例
The Application Research on System Planning Method of Supply Chain Management System by Using Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) at Q Company
供應鏈管理系統、系統規劃模式、服務導向架構

在今日高度競爭之商業環境中，受到Internet及電子商務等各種新技術不斷推陳出新的影響，製造業界開始體驗到前所未見的競爭壓力，也使得供應鏈的結構變得極為複雜。同時，也促成協同運作與委外服務觀念的興起，使得企業都必須跳脫傳統的供應鏈管理系統邏輯。「開發即整合，整合即開發」是SOA的基本思維，顛覆傳統應用導向的思維，強調的「服務」是以業務為主軸，而著眼於貫穿資訊孤島，提供可排列組合的各項服務，這樣的一個基本的精神剛好可補傳統供應鏈管理系統資訊無法分享之不足。個案公司Q公司是世界級製造企業也為筆記型電腦代工的製造龍頭為台灣製造業的一個很具代表性的公司。目前，高科技業界便是與在技術或產品方面有互補性的廠商或合作夥伴，進行策略聯盟及合作開發，以發揮相乘的效果，而因為如此供應鏈管理正逐步朝供應鏈各廠商之間的協同（Collaboration）與同時性（Synchronization）趨勢發展，而Q公司在面臨到此一變化，其既有供應系統也面臨資訊無法整合之困境，因此Q公司在經過評估之後嘗試於供應鏈系統中導入SOA架構，而本研究將針對Q公司導入SOA架構之專案計畫為個案，對國內製造業之供應鏈管理系統提出一個可執行方向，並期望提出一個VEISS系統規劃發展的模式供台灣製造廠在導入SOA架構以其對於其與下游供應商與上游客戶之間提供更密切的整合提高公司本身的競爭力之參考依據。
Because of the ever-increasing dependence on the Internet and electronic commerce the technology manufacturing industry is experiencing unprecedented competition pressure. This phenomenon makes traditional supply chains become more complicated; meanwhile, it leads to the emergence of collaboration and outsourcing. Both concepts also cause enterprises and their strategic partners to jump out of the traditional framework of supply chain management system (SCM).The basic idea of SOA is “development is integration; integration is development.” It stresses that business activities are the core of services. Hence, SOA provides distinct types of information functions for people to use in order to fill the gap between information system and business activities. The advantageous spirit of SOA compensates for the insufficiency of traditional information system in supply chainmanagement.Q Company is the leader in the market of notebook OEM. In such intensely competitive environments, the best way to survive for IT manufacturing firms is to make strategic alliances and then create synergy. The trend in supply chain management is moving toward collaboration and synchronization among different firms. However, facing this new challenge and the continuous innovation in products and manufacturing processes, Q Company introduced the SOA concept into its SCM and obtained a beneficial result. The result of this study is to use Q Company as a case study to propose a VEISS model in information system planning and development to help domestic firms improve their SCM with the SOA concept. The managerial implication is that a firm can improve or sustain its competitive advantages with the seamless integration of itself and itspartner companies via the use of this VEISS model.
