「出口」－海洋生物的碎形表現
Outlet-Fractal Representation of Marine Life
碎形、混沌、自我相似性、分數維度、混沌動態性、無限延展性

遼闊無邊的大藍，是生之始、萬物歸之處，海洋是全球百分之九十九的生物棲地，也主宰著地球的氣候變化、物質循環及整個生態系的正常運作；然而幾個世紀以來，社會一直被笛卡兒的線性思維與牛頓的化約宇宙觀所主宰著，人定勝天是化約主義者的夢想，此體系下的科技產物卻使得地球生態環境遭到嚴重破壞，海洋正面臨著種種環境問題。1970年代出現的「混沌」（Chaos）、「碎形」（Fractal）理論，是一種對於整體性、混沌及變易觀念的全新認識，充份反映後現代之各式不平衡、不穩定、非連續性、無序、斷裂和突變的現象，並提供一種新觀念去解答所有宇宙、人類自我存在以及人類與世間之間的關係等問題。本創作以海洋生物為主題，運用碎形表現大自然之美，並以碎形思維闡述人類與環境的關係。創作範圍屬於數位藝術，形式以數位平面、半立體多媒材裝置與動畫等方式呈現；美感形式上，以具象、有機抽象與幾何抽象表現為主，尋求視覺上「多樣的統一」之美感。希冀能以碎形的「自我相似性」、「分數維度」、「混沌動態性」、「無限延展性」等特徵所延伸的思維，予觀者觀看作品感受海洋豐富生命力的同時，亦思考人類與萬物之間存在著密不可分的牽繫，最終尋求自然生態環境與人的和諧共存。
Vast boundless greatly blue, is lives the beginning, the creation turns over to place. In the whole world, there are 99% creatures live in the ocean which controls global climatic change, the material circulation and the entire ecosystem operation. Since several centuries, society was controlled continuously by Rene Descartes’ linear thinking and Newton’s reductionist worldview. They thought that human beings would conquer Nature. Science and technology caused the serious destruction to the ecological environment. The ocean is facing all sorts of environment problems. Chaos and Fractal theory were appeared in 1970 ages which were one new knowledge about the integrity, the chaos and the change. They reflect adequately to various phenomena of the post-modern age, such as imbalance, non-continuous, disorder, break and sudden change. Chaos and Fractal theory provide one new idea to explain the Universe, the mankind’s self-existence and the relationship between mankind and the world.The theme of my creation is marine life; utilizes fractal to represent beauty of Nature, and then elaborates the relationship between human beings and environment by fractal thought. The scope of my creations are digital arts. The form are graphic arts, half three-dimensional multi-media installation and animation. The esthetic form are representationalism, organic abstract and geometry abstract; finally seek for "Variety in unification". When viewers watch the artwork, they can feel rich vitality of the ocean. At the same time, they can think that human beings have an essential kinship with the world through the characteristics of fractal which are "self-similarity", "fractional dimension", "chaotic dynamics", "unlimited expansion". Finally pursue harmonious coexistence of the environment and mankind.
