一位多重障礙兒母親的生命處境：自我敘說探究
A life situation of a mother who has a child with multiple disability：a self-narrative inquiry
多重障礙兒、生命處境、自我敘說
本研究主要研究目的，在於提供多重障礙兒母親-國媽，經驗分享、創造女人發聲空間，藉以突顯一向為男流社會所漠視或邊緣化的女性真相。   本研究以質性方法進行，以自我敘說取向對國媽生命處境加以探究，研究者在資料收集上主要以訪談法為主，以國媽修行心得手稿資料為輔，以此重建與分析其生命處境。第三章「國媽的生命脈絡」，敘說其背景；第四章「自我敘說變化」說明訪談後種種變化；第五章「重返故事的意義」，著重在特定社會結構下的女性生命處境；第六章則討論本研究之研究價值.限制與建議。
The main purpose of this study is to provide Gwo-mom , a mother who has a child with multiple disability , a space to share her experiences and  create woman's voice . Where upon to manifest the feminine truth that always ignored or marginalized by the male class society.   This study employs the qualitative research as the methodology , and uses self-narrative approach to inquire Gwo-mom’s life situation. The data are mainly from nonstructural interview and adjuvantly from Gwo-mom’s  handwritings of  religion impressions, as a result  to reconstruct and analyze the life situation.   In the third chapter《Gwo-mom’s life context》, we use first person penmanship to tell her background, pigpen live, marriage live and evolve from work ,let readers grasp her context.   In the fourth chapter《The changes of self-narrative》, at the very start , we use first person penmanship to tell her changes after interview. In the end , we analyze her changing progress of self and emotion , and share her joy of self- growth from shifting and reframing by self-narrative to seek a new position which reveal her subjectivity.   In the fifth chapter 《Going back the meanings of the story》, we emphasize women’s life situation which is under the specific social structure , and use Feminism viewpoint to deconstruct the distortions and the straits which are brought by mainstream social value. From these important life experiences：the treats from husband relatives, sisters-in-law conflict, the suffering for pray a son and the pious religion ,we can comprehend the life situation of a mother who has a child with multiple disability . Inspect the feminine war, the procreation person blame, the caregivers feminization, the poorization of the time and economics are connected with patriarchy culture.   In the sixth chapter , we discuss the value and limiting of the study, and appear the reflexivity from researcher who is a special educational teacher. At last , we offer the further suggestion of the study and the administration organizations.
