上市審議委員會決議之因素及對IPOs績效之影響
The Determinants of Voting Behavior of the Review Committee and Its Influence on the Performance of IPO Firms
上市審議委員會、IPOs績效

上市審議委員會為公司申請上市過程中，專業且獨立的外部決策單位，過去鮮有研究探討審議委員所扮演的中介角色，能否降低資訊不對稱進而促進資本市場的發展。台灣證券交易所於每次審核公司申請上市時，由3-4位交易所內部人士，以及8位以上專業外部人士組成委員會審議。本研究鎖定上市審議委員會開會相關資訊，包括投票結果、詢問事項、建議事項，探究影響審議委員投票因素，以及委員會投票結果對上市公司訂定承銷價、首次交易價格、以及後續財務績效與風險的影響。由logit模型的結果顯示，會計師簽具保留意見或變更會計師（負向）、公司規模（正向）以及上市前一年稅前純益佔實收資本比（正向）以及是否為電子產業(負向)，為影響委員是否全數通過及核准申請公司上市的關鍵因素。對比全數通過與非全數通過兩群樣本之上市後績效差異發現，全數通過群組後續的財務績效指標（包括ROE、ROA、EPS、P/E）顯著大於非全數通過群組，且其差異於上市後兩年達到最大。上市審議委員之投票結果顯示，隨著反對票數的增加，上市價格的訂定及上市後的獲利表現呈現反向的變動，而股價波動呈正向增加，獲得較多上市審議委員認同之公司在價格、獲利及風險上表現較好，上市審議委員的投票結果確有保障獲利及風險控管的功效。
One of the major functions of the SEC reviewing board, the first independent and surveillance intermediary, is to ameliorate asymmetric information between IPO firms and outside investors and therefore to facilitate capital market developments. It is astonishing to find that the issue was sparsely covered in literature. In most cases the reviewing board in Taiwan comprises of 3-4 bureaucratic insiders and more than 8 outside professionals. In this study we would like to investigate the impact of the reviewing board in general on IPO firms’ offer price metrics, initial price metrics, and post-IPO financial performance measures.The results from logit regressions show that a consensus agreement among the board, unanimously voting for an IPO application, is more likely attain when the applicant is large in capitalization and profitable. In contrast, it is less likely to attain when the associated accountant is being changed or with reserved opinions regarding the firm’s reports and/or when the applicant is an electronic firm. We find that the voting outcome of the reviewing board provides a discerning effect that the firms in the unanimously approved group are associated with higher financial performance measures (ROE, ROA, EPS, and P/E) than the firms in the non-unanimously approved group with the differences being more significant in two years after IPOs.The offer prices and profitability measures are negatively associated with an increase in member’s veto. Moreover, the non-unanimous firms exhibit higher price volatility as compared to the unanimous ones. The overall picture support the surveillance function of the SEC reviewing board that is effective in assuring the quality of IPO firms.
