中小企業間非正式人際互動、社會資本與企業經營發展關係之初探
An exploration of the relationship during extra-stakeholders’ informal interpersonal interaction for small and medium sized enterprises, social capital and business development.
中小企業、非正式人際互動、社會資本、企業經營發展
論文題目：中小企業間非正式人際互動、社會資本與企業經營發展關係之初探校(院)系所組別：輔仁大學管理學研究所碩士在職專班研究生：蕭富誠    指導老師：楊君琦    論文頁數：130論文提要內容：   根據經濟部中小企業處在2005年發行的中小企業白皮書中，談到民國93年台灣中小企業已超過116萬家，占全體企業家數的97.8%；就業人口共755萬人以上，占全體的77.2%；因此，我們可以說台灣中小企業是近年來台灣經濟奇蹟的重要創造者之一，同時也是持續關係著台灣未來經濟發展的主要動力。但是，中小企業的特質中，普遍呈現出資金不足、家族企業型態、規模不經濟的情形；為了平衡在實體資本、人力資本的不足，中小企業往往會尋求社會資本的助力，以謀求其企業的經營發展。   那麼，社會資本要從何處建構及累積呢？檢視企業間的各項活動：產、 銷、人、發、財及知識管理之外，企業與企業間也常從事一些非正式的人際互動；正式的人際互動指的是面對面透過正式會議的溝通，但有時候非正式的人際互動往往更加助益於人際關係上的拓展及從中獲取更多重要的資源；而這些關係與資源就是社會資本核心的內涵。   經過本研究的個案訪談後，瞭解非正式的人際互動方式有很多，諸如餐敘、運動、旅遊、娛樂、牌局、益智及其他等等，其中以餐敘與運動最為頻繁；而運動所可以累積的社會資本一般評價為最高，在運動項目中又得出以高爾夫球的方式在目前最為流行和最佳。總之，針對不同的利益關係人進行適當的非正式之人際互動，可以建構社會資本以助益於企業的經營發展。關鍵詞：中小企業，非正式人際互動，社會資本，企業經營發展
Title of Thesis An exploration of the relationship during extra-stakeholders’ informal interpersonal interaction for small and medium sized enterprises, social capital and business development.Name of Institute Graduate Institute of Management Fu Jen Catholic UniversityName of Student Fu-Cheng Hsiao    Advisor Dr. Chun-Chi YangTotal Page 130Abstract  In the white paper of small and medium sized enterprises issued in 2005 according to Economic Department of Republic of China, speak of it that there is over 1.16 million companies in 2004, shares 97.8% of total; employed population amounts to more than 7,550,000 people, 77.2% of the all. So, we can say that the small and medium sized enterprises of Taiwan are one of the important creators of the economic miracle of Taiwan in recent years, at the same time it is the main motive force of lasting economic development in the future of Taiwan too. However, in the specialties of small and medium sized enterprises, generally lacking funds, family firm style, uneconomical scale were demonstrated; In order to balance it in physical capital, human capital insufficiency, small and medium sized enterprises will often seek the helping of the social capital, for the development of management of its enterprise.  Then, where does social capital come from to create and accumulate? Inspect every activity among enterprises producing, marketing, HR, R&D, financial and KM, excepts, the enterprise and enterprises are often engaged in some informal interpersonal interaction; The formal one means  that passes the communication in the formal meeting by face to face, but sometimes the informal interpersonal interaction that often benefits on the interpersonal relationships further and obtaining more important resources from it; And these relations and resources are the central intension of social capital.  After case interview of this research, understand that there are a lot of informal interpersonal interaction ways, such as meal chatting, sporting, traveling, entertainment, gambling, benefits intelligence and others etc., among them it is most frequently happened by meal chatting and sporting; And the sporting is being the highest appraisal generally to create and accumulate the social capital, by the way, golf game is the most popular and the best way at present in the sports events especially for the electric and electronic industries. In a word, engages the proper informal interpersonal interaction with all kinds of extra stakeholders can create the useful social capital to help the development of business and enterprise.Keywords small and medium sized enterprises, informal interpersonal interaction, social capital, business development.
