人格特質、印象管理策略選擇與印象管理策略知覺之研究，以團體套裝旅遊中領隊-團員為例
An Empirical Study on Personality Characteristics, Impression Management Strategies Selection and Perceived Impression Management Strategies – The Group Package Tourist leader and members.
團體套裝旅遊、人格特質、印象管理策略
觀光產業逐漸獲得國人與政府的重視，因此旅行社的競爭也日益劇烈，然在短期市場無法迅速擴張的情況下，與現有顧客保持良好互動關係則相當重要，團體套裝旅遊領隊則是旅遊行程與團員互動最緊密者，領隊與團員的人際互動更是團員知覺旅遊品質好壞的重要參考指標。本研究之目的在探討領隊與團員在出團過程中，領隊如何進行印象管理在團員心目中形成好印象，並且探討團員對於領隊所進行的各種印象管理方式知覺程度為何。期望在經由本研究後，對於旅行社進行領隊篩選、教育訓練有所建議。本研究採問卷調查方式，針對領隊人格特質、領隊選擇印象管理策略與團員知覺印象管理策略進行實證上研究。樣本對象為國內團體套裝旅遊的領隊與團員。共收集到485份有效問卷。利用統計軟體AMOS 5.0作線性結構模式之分析探討。    研究結果有下列發現；(1)領隊「自我監控能力」對於領隊選擇「逢迎討好」策略、「自我推薦」策略與「模範」策略有顯著正向影響。(2)領隊「權術主義」對於領隊選擇「逢迎討好」策略、「自我推薦」策略、「哀求」策略與「威脅」策略有顯著正向影響。(3) 領隊「社交焦慮」對於領隊選擇「逢迎討好」策略有顯著正向影響。(4)領隊所使用的印象管理策略，除了「逢迎討好」之外，其餘策略與團員所知覺印象管理策略有顯著正向影響。
The government and people emphasize gradually on development of tourism industry. The competitions of travel agencies are also radical. It is important to keep up good relationship with current customers, especially when total industry sales growth slowly. The leader of group package tourist (GPT) interacts with GPT members closely, so members perceive travel quality depending on personal interaction with the leader. The objective of this research discusses how leaders apply impression management strategies to develop good impression to members and what degree members perceive impression management strategies. Suggesting travel agencies select comport and train leaders how to use impression management strategies.    This research adopted to questionnaire investigate focus on leaders’ personality characteristics, leaders’ impression management strategies and members perceived impression management strategies. Samples came from the leaders and members of the same GPT and used AMOS 5.0 anglicizing structural equation modeling. Total samples are 485 paired questionnaires (leader-member).    The finding of this research (1) leaders’ self-monitoring ability is positive to ingratiation, self-promotion, and exemplification individually; (2) leaders’ Machiavellianism is positive to ingratiation, self-promotion, supplication, and intimidation individually; (3) leaders’ social anxiety is positive to ingratiation; (4) it is not significant between leaders used ingratiation and members perceive ingratiation, but other impression management strategies used by leaders are positive to perceived by members.
