代言人式電視運動廣告體驗認知以消費者購買動機觀念影響之研究
A Study of The Effect of Cognition of Endorsement Sports TV Commercials on Domestic Consumer Purchasing
電視、運動廣告、代言人、購買動機

本研究旨在於了解國內消費者對運動產品之購買動機與代言人電視運動廣告之體認情形以及消費者背景資料的分佈情形，進而了解不同特性之消費者族群、購買動機之差異情形。同時以皮爾遜積差相關法加以分析，以了解國內消費者、代言人廣告與購買動機之關聯性。研究結論如下：ㄧ、台北地區運動用品專賣店參觀消費者之人口統計變項在性別方面以男性為主；婚姻狀況以未婚人口居多；在年齡方面以18－24歲居多；職業方面學生居多；在教育程度方面大專居多；在平均月收入方面以15,000以下為居多。二、消費者對電視運動廣告代言人三構面之「專業性」認知最高。最重視運動廣告代言人之體認項目為：「代言人擁有豐富的運動相關知識」；而認知最低之體認項目為：「代言人是獨具個人魅力的」。三、消費者對運動產品購買動機三構面之「滿足感受構面」認知最高。消費者購買動機認知題項部分，最重視之運動產品購買動機項目為：「提升更優良的運動品質」；而認知最低之運動產品購買動機項目為：「獲得其他人的羨慕與目光」。四、性別部分在運動廣告代言人認知之「可靠度」與「吸引力」上是有所差異的，婚姻狀況在運動廣告代言人認知之三構面皆上是有所差異的，其餘人口統計變項在年齡、職業、教育程度及平均月收入之參觀消費者對代言人電視運動廣告體認均無顯著差異。五、在不同性別、婚姻狀況、職業、教育程度及平均月收入之購物者對購買動機均無顯著差異。而不同年齡之消費者在購物動機之「滿足感受」部份有顯著差異。六、運動廣告代言人認知情形與消費者的購買動機有顯著相關。代言人之「專業性」與與購買動機之「知識刺激」及「社會認定」兩構面為顯著正相關，代言人之「可靠度」與購買動機三大構面均為顯著正相關，代言人之「吸引力」與購買動機之「滿足感受」構面為顯著正相關。
This study aimed to realize domestic consumers’ purchasing motivation to sports goods, cognition of the sports commercials with endorsers on TV, and demographics. In addition, it tried to uncover the differences between consumers’ demographics and purchasing motivation and the relationship among domestic consumers, endorsement commercials, and purchasing motivation by Pearson product moment coefficient of correlation. The major findings in this study were described as follows1.  Consumer characteristics of sports goods stores in Taipei were male, single, between 18 to 24 years old, college, student, and income under NT 15,000 per month.2.  Consumers have the highest cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on expertness. The highest item of cognition was “the endorser is rich in sports knowledge”, and the lowest item of cognition was “the endorser is of unique personal charm.”3.  Consumers have the highest cognition of sports goods purchasing motivation on sensory gratification. The highest item of cognition was “to enhance exercising qualities ”, and the lowest item of cognition was “to get others’ admiration and attraction.”4.  There were significant differences between consumers’ gender and cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on trustworthiness and attraction, and between consumers’ marriage and cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on expertness, trustworthiness and attraction.5.  There were significant differences between consumers’ age and purchasing motivation of sensory gratification.6.  There were significant relationship between cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on expertness and consumer purchasing motivation of intellectual stimulation and social approval. There were significant relationship between cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on trustworthiness and consumer purchasing motivation of intellectual stimulation, social approval, and sensory gratification. There were significant relationship between cognition of sports TV commercial endorsers on attraction and consumer purchasing motivation of sensory gratification.
