以ATP生物冷光方法預測盒餐微生物品質
Application of ATP Bioluminescence Method to Predict The Microbiological Quality of Boxed Meal
ATP生物冷光方法、盒餐、微生物品質

本研究目的為探討應用ATP生物冷光方法快速評估餐盒微生物品質之可能性以便應用於出貨前或展售架上之現場微生物品質評估。盒餐樣品主要來自台北縣三間盒餐工廠。首先選定國內盒餐常見菜餚，將之個別於35℃下培養以觀測總生菌之生長速率；再於這些菜餚中決定出微生物生長最快之菜餚以作為ATP生物冷光方法施測對象之指標性菜餚。選定指標性菜餚後，用指標性菜餚建立由ATP生物冷光方法所測得之RLU值與指標菜餚總生菌數之關係。結果顯示熟食植物性食品類(高麗菜、青江菜)之微生物生長速率比其他三類盒餐菜餚(白飯、熟食動物性食品類、熟食加工品類)顯著地高（p<0.05），故被選定為盒餐微生物危害指標性菜餚。在應用ATP生物冷光方法於測定指標性菜餚之RLU值時，為簡化現場品管所需之設備乃發展徒手震盪法處理樣品，並與鐵胃法處理樣品做比較；結果發現兩者在生菌數上並無顯著差異(p>0.05)。震盪處理後食品檢液中之RLU干擾物質可以過濾法經由濾液中除去，濾膜腹水後所得之總生菌數也與未過濾前食品檢液中之總生菌數無顯著差異(p>0.05)。濾膜復水後所測得之RLU值與總生菌數發現呈高度相關，其相關係數r2為0.93（p<0.05），所得之迴歸方程式為y=－6.9303+2.2072x（n=60）。本研究結論認為可以利用ATP生物冷光方法快速估測出盒餐指標性菜餚(蔬菜類)之總生菌數，實際操作時可以使用之徒手震盪法及過濾膜法來處理食物樣品，不受必須於實驗室操作及具備繁複之儀器與藥品之限制，所得之RUL值可依所建立之方程式快速估測其微生物品質；此簡易快速之方法可以供現場品管或現場衛生稽核時使用。
The application of ATP bioluminescence method to rapidly assess the microbiological quality of boxed meal before shipping or on the store shelves was investigated. Meal samples were taken from the three local boxed meal plants in Taipei County. Selected popular component food items of the boxed meal were incubated at 35℃ to observe the growth rates of mesophilic bacteria in the individual food items. The selected food items were categorized into four food groups, i.e. rice, cooked animals, cooked vegetables, and cooked processed food. The group that showed the highest bacterial growth rates would be used as the indicator food group the microbial population of which would represent the worst scenario of the microbiological quality of a boxed meal, which would be assessed with ATP bioluminescence method. The results indicated that cooked vegetables exhibited the significantly higher (p<0.05) bacterial growth rates at 35℃ than any other food groups, therefore chosen as the hazard indicator for the boxed meal. In the application of ATP bioluminescence method, the simplified manual shaking for sample treatment was found to be no significantly different from the stomach method in the yield of aerobic plate counts (p>0.05）. Filtration was able to rid of the cell-free ATP in the filtrate and the aerobic plate counts recovered from the filter membrane were not significantly different from those before filtration (p>0.05）. The RLU values for the reconstituted filter membrane were found to be highly correlated with its aerobic plate counts (n=60, r2 = 0.93, p<0.05）, the regression equation being y = -6.9303+2.2072x, where y is log CFU g and x is log RLU g. It is concluded that ATP bioluminescence method may be applied to rapidly assess the worst scenario of the microbiological quality of the boxed meal by measuring the RLU values of the vegetable items with the aids of simplified sample preparation and filtration.
