以平衡計分卡為基的研發部門績效評估指標之可行性研究
A Research on the Feasibility of Balance Scorecard for the Research and Development Department
平衡計分卡
平衡計分卡（Balance Scorecard Card）歷經十多年的演進，在國外已經被廣為使用，至今已成為全方位的策略管理利器，相較於歐美國家，本土企業使用平衡計分卡的普遍度相對較低，若台灣欲成為亞太營運管理中心，更需要加快國際化的腳步，因應全球化、自由化的強大壓力，企業在管理上更需要一個強而有力的利器來輔佐，平衡計分卡就是一個很好的選擇，目前各大企業在此部份的應用大多在財務、營業及人力資源等管理方面，使用在研發部門的實例較少，另一方面，專為研發部門績效管理，所設計的資訊系統亦很少，很難進行”量化”的評估，故將朝此方向進行研究，為研發部門的未來尋求績效評核及管理的方向。傳統上，企業多是以會計衡量結果來代表各單位的績效。然而，財務面的量度為公司營運的結果，但若公司只重視「結果」，不重視「過程」，在現今顧客導向的環境下，不但管理者無法做為提高員工向心力，提升服務品質，降低成本，改善工作流程，增加顧客滿意度的決策依據，甚至可能造成管理者只注重短期財務目標，而研究發展、教育訓練等有助於建立長期競爭優勢的投資，被當作當期費用，或遭受管理者無情的刪除，影響公司長期的發展。傳統過度依賴財務性衡量的績效衡量方式，已遭人詬病許久，學界及業界也不斷的檢討不當的績效評估對企業的影響，並試圖發展出適合目前及未來企業經營環境的績效評估方式。另一方面，在日益激烈競爭的外在環境下，企業欲求永續經營與與生存發展，則必須強化企業的長期競爭力。為維持企業利潤水準與競爭地位，企業必須持續不斷的推出新產品，若不從事新產品創新的研究發展，致使產品過時，其市場將被更具創新能力的競爭者所取代。因此，企業唯有自行培養研發能力，持續開發創新產品以增進經濟利益，才是永續發展的根本。在面臨競爭逐漸加劇的環境下，企業策略制訂與執行的良窳成為經營成敗的關鍵。以往在公司高階管理團隊制訂策略以後，並沒有一個機制，能夠在整體組織中有效溝通策略，達成共識，也無法確實掌握公司是否已全體動員，朝向落實策略邁進。歸咎原因，在於策略未與績效評估系統有效的連結。因為績效衡量的結果，有誘導員工及組織行為的能力，若能將員工的目標與組織的目標連結在一起，則可以透過激勵員工的方式達成公司經營的目標。有鑑於此，本研究針對研發部門廣發線上問卷，希望經有集思廣義的方式尋找建構於平衡計分卡上，有效的研發部門管理績效指標，作為企業研發部門管理及績效評估的準則。
The balanced idea branch customs station (Balance Scorecard Card) has been through repeatedly more than 10 years evolution, in overseas widely is already used, until now has become the omni-directional strategy management sharp weapon, compares to the European and American countries, the native place enterprise relatively uses the balance idea branch customs station universal to be lower, if Taiwan wants into the Asian and Pacific transport business administrative center, needs to speed up the internationalization the footsteps, in accordance to the globalization, the liberalized formidable pressure, the enterprise needs a powerful sharp weapon in the management to assist, the balanced idea branch customs station was a very good choice, at present each big enterprise in this part application mostly in management aspect and so on finance, business and human resources, Use in research and development department's example less, on the other hand, specially for the research and development department achievements management, the information system which designs also very few, is very difficult carries on "the quantification" the appraisal, therefore will face this direction to conduct the research, will seek the achievements for the research and development department's future to comment the nucleus and the management direction.In the tradition, the enterprise are many is weighs the result by accountant to represent various units the achievements. However, financial surface measurement for company transport business result, but if the company only takes "the result", does not take "the process", guides in the nowadays customer under environment, not only the superintendent is unable to do for enhances the staff centripetal force, the promotion service quality, reduces the cost, the improvement work flow, increases the customer degree of satisfaction the policy-making basis, even possibly creates the superintendent only to pay great attention to the short-term finance goal, but studies the development, the education and training and so on is helpful to the establishment long-term competitive advantage investment, is treated as works as the time expense, or suffers the superintendent heartless deletion, affects the company long-term development. The tradition excessively relies on the finance weight the achievements weight way, has suffered the person to denounce , the educational world and the field also unceasing self-criticism improper achievements appraisal to enterprise's influence, and attempts to develop suits at present and the future enterprise manages the environment the achievements appraisal way.On the other hand, in under the steep competition external environment, the enterprise desires day by day continues forever the management with with the survival development, then must strengthen the enterprise the long-term competitive ability. In order to maintain the enterprise profit standard and the competition status, the enterprise must unceasingly continue to promote the new product, if is not engaged in the new product innovation the research development, causes the product to be obsolete, its market the competitor which will have the innovation ability is substituted. Therefore, the enterprise only has the voluntarily raise research and development ability, continues to develop the innovation product to promote the economic, is continues forever the development the basis. In faces under the environment which the competition gradually intensifies, the enterprise strategy making and the execution is good becomes the management success or failure the key. Formerly drew up after the strategy in the company high step management team, certainly a mechanism, has not been able in the whole organization the effective communication strategy, achieved the mutual recognition, whether also is unable truly to grasp company all to mobilize, to face the realization strategy to make great strides forward. Puts the blame on the reason, lies in the strategy not to appraise system effective linking with the achievements. Because of the achievements weight result, has induces the staff and the organization behavior ability, if can links staff's goal and organization's goal in the same place, then may penetrate drove staff's way achieves the goal which the company manages.So, this research broadly sends on-line in view of the research and development department to ask the volume, hoped after has the collection to think the generalized way to seek constructs the construction to embrace to the balance scoring, the effective research and development department manages the achievements target, takes the enterprise research and development department management and the achievements appraisal criterion.
