以本體論為基之情境感知服務推理
Reasoning of Ontology-Based Context Awareness Services
情境感知、本體論、案例式推理
隨著行動裝置和無線通訊的發展和普及，人們可以「Anyone、Anydevice、Anytime、Anywhere」來存取所需要的資訊和服務，一項挑戰在於使用者對於服務的要求是非常變動和不確定性，情境感知 (Context-Awareness)或許是一個解決方案，情境感知的技術可以透過許多感應器，例如：GPS、RFID、Camera、Monitor來擷取使用者的情境資訊並深層的了解情境，系統利用情境來提供適當的服務給使用者。本研究試圖去找到一個完善定義的情境模式，此情境模式能表達人與環境間的關聯，因此採用本體論 (Ontology)來描述情境，OWL (Web Ontology Language)是一個本體論描述語言，它藉著支援XML、RDF和EDF Schema來提供更多辭彙以賦予語意，本研究採用OWL為本體論的描述語言。情境感知的推理引擎必須考慮到情境的變動性，因此，本研究探討專家系統中推理引擎的相關文獻，本研究使用案例式推理(Case-Based Reasoning)來解決此問題。採用案例式推理於情境感知有兩個優點 (1)案例式推理支援變動情境下的推理， (2)案例式推理可以隨著案例的使用次數來自我調整並提升推理的準確度。本研究比較以位置為基的情境感知系統，實驗結果也證明本研究推理機制確實優於以位置為基的情境感知系統。
Following with the development and popularization of mobile devices and wireless communications, people can “anyone, anydevice, anytime and anywhere” catch information and services. A challenge is that the requirement of users for services is very dynamic and uncertain. “Context-Awareness” may be a solution for this problem. Context-Awareness techniques use sensors (for example, GPS, RFID, Camera, Monitor) to capture user context information and further understand context, and the system makes use of context it captures to provide appropriate services to users.  This research attempts to find a well-defined context model. This context model can describe correlation of people and environment. Therefore, it uses ontology to describe the context. OWL (Web Ontology Language) is an ontology language that is supported by XML, RDF, and RDF Schema by providing additionitional vocabularies along with the formal Semantics. In this research, OWL is used to be the ontology language. The reasoning engine of Context-Awareness must consider the dynamics of context. Therefore, this research surveys the reasoning engines in related references of some expert systems, and uses case-based reasoning (CBR) to solve the problem. Using CBR for reasoning of Context-Awareness has two advantages (1) CBR supports reasoning in various context, (2) CBR can self-adjust itself following with cases’ usage times to increase its precision of reasoning. This research compares results with location-based Context-Awareness systems. Results of experiments show that the reasoning engine of this research is better than those of location-based Context-Awareness systems.
