企業併購過程中，IT權力移轉之因素分析
A Study of IT power transfer when M&A activity occurred
企業併購、權力移轉

全球的企業併購事件愈演愈烈，金額愈來愈大，在轟動一時的新聞之後，組織的重整與改造，是否能讓企業的併購發揮一加一大於二的綜效，是企業經營者最需要關注的問題。而在組織面臨變動的同時，資訊部門作為現代化企業的重要支援中心，資訊系統的走向亦是影響企業併購成敗的關鍵因素。因此本研究針對此一題作深入探討，冀能協助面臨此一劇變的資訊部門主管，快速找到有利於組織的因應策略，帶領部門安然度過劇變，攀上另一高峰。根據本研究的結果，在併購過程中資訊權力的移轉是有時序性的。本研究亦發展出一程序模型來解釋資訊權力移轉因素。透過大型跨國案例的實證，我們證實了企業併購動機、企業整合策略、資訊部門整合策略與資整合計畫之間環環相扣的關係，其結果並一步一步深入的影響了資訊部門的權力移轉。此外，我們亦發現了組織政治對於部門層級的權力影響相當有限。資訊主管不應以杞人憂天之姿煩惱未來的部門權力，反而應從基本面思考，掌握資訊部門對於公司的重要性，進一步了解企業併購的緣由，並評估對手公司的情況，思考最能符合企業併購原則的資訊整併方案。並非是被併公司的主管就一定處於弱勢，在開放、實力導向盛行的企業文化中，最快掌握狀況的主管愈有優勢。本研究認為，在組織變動大幅變動之時，正是重新檢視部門的靜態權力(中心性、不可替代性及處理不確定性的能力)的絕佳良機，若能趁此時機大幅改善靜態權力的根本要素，將有助於資訊部門權力在基本面做大幅度的改善，以更強的資訊力量提升企業的競爭力。
Global enterprises M&A activities grow in intensity, the amount of money is larger and larger, after the sensational news, reformation and transformation organizing, it is the question that CEO needs to pay close attention to most whether to produce the vertical result which is greater than two of one plus one.While facing the change in the organization, the information department, as the important support centre of modernized enterprises, the trend of the information system is also the key factor influencing enterprises to merge the success or failure. So this research does the deep discussion to this question, help to face the information department's executive of this drastic change, find effectively on organize because of in conformity with strategy, lead department to be safe to spend the violent change fast, climb another peak.According to the result of this research, there is time sequence nature in the transfer of information power in the course of merging, this research also develops one procedure model to explain information power transfer the factor.In addition, quite limited that the power to department's level is influenced that we have also found the politics of organizing. CIO should not be with the appearance worried and future department power of meeting trouble halfway, should think from the basic side, grasp the importance to company of information department instead, understand the cause that enterprises merge further, assess the situation of rival's company, it think not it is merge to most can accord with by enterprising information of principle combine scheme is exactly and executives of company will certainly have lasted weak tendency, lead in the corporate culture in vogue in the open, strength, the executive mastering the state most quickly has advantages.This research shows, when organize large size change of change, look over the static power of the department again formally (the centre, unsubstitutability and ability to deal with uncertainty) Excellent for opportunity,it is improve key element not basic of power not static of by a wide margin this the good opportunities not to if can take advantage of, will contribute to department's power of information and do the improvement by a large margin on the basic side, improve the competitiveness of enterprises with stronger information strength.
