企業識別系統、體驗行銷對品牌形象關係之研究—以統一星巴克咖啡為例
A Study of the Relationship among CIS, Experiential Marketing, and Brand Image- A Case Study of Starbucks

企業識別系統
體驗行銷
品牌形象
統一星巴克
AMOS

當今的時代，產品是以激烈化、多樣化、專精化三化為中心而不斷突破，市場競爭的日趨激烈，社會大眾的消費型態也隨著物質文明的演進而不停地更替。此外，當今的消費者往往是依循自我對企業的觀感來判斷、評價企業。購買一商品時，面對眾多品牌的同一類商品，如果無法判斷哪一個品牌較好，往往就根據各品牌的固有形象作為購買標準；在現代商品市場中，許多同類商品的性能、質量基本相同或差異不大，決定人們選擇的往往是一個重要的心理因素—對不同企業印象好壞的差別。研究目的重點為：一、研究企業識別系統中各變數間對於品牌形象有影響。二、研究策略體驗模組中各變數間對於品牌形象有影響。本研究以統一星巴克咖啡為例，調查統一星巴克之企業識別系統以及體驗行銷策略對於其品牌形象是否有正向顯著之影響。本研究採用便利抽樣，並以網路問卷發放之方式，回收共計212份，研究方法採用信、效度分析與線性結構模式為主要分析工具，並以SPSS 10.0及AMOS 5.0 為分析軟體。實證研究結果發現：1.理念識別對於品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。2.活動識別對於品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。3.視覺識別對於品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。4.參與者的感官體驗對品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。5.參與者的情感體驗對品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。6.參與者的思考體驗對品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。7.參與者的行動體驗對品牌形象具有正向但不顯著之影響。8.參與者的關聯體驗對品牌形象具有正向顯著之影響。本研究根據研究結果對統一星巴克咖啡歸納出八點實務管理上之建議：1.重視員工教育訓練。2.發展多元化商品。3.強調品牌標誌。4.突顯店內氛圍。5.重視消費者感受。6.結合時下流行商品。7.改善會員制度。8.舉辦咖啡閱讀體驗營。
Nowadays, products are continuously developed by intensification, diversification and specialization. The competition in market is increasingly intense and the consuming types of people are changing with the process of material culture. Moreover, consumers nowadays always judge and evaluate corporations by their impressions of them. When buying a product and facing the same product of many brands, if we can’t judge what brand is better, our buying standards often base on the brand’s indigenous image. In modern merchandise market, the functions and qualities of many similar products are the same or not different much. Therefore, what can decide the choices of people is always an important psychological factor-the differences of people’s impressions for different corporation.The goal of this research are the following statements, first is to investigate every variable of CIS influence the brand image and second is to investigate every variable influence the brand image.This research takes starbucks for example, and investigates whether CIS and experiential marketing strategy will positively and apparently influence the brand image of starbucks. This research uses convenient sampling and internet questionnaire. The total sample amounts to 212. The methodology of this research adopts reliability, validity analysis and SEMs as main analytical tools and SPSS 10.0 and AMOS 5.0 as analytical soft wares.The real findings of the research are 1. mission identity positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 2. behavior identity positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 3. visual identity positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 4. sense experience positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 5. feel experience positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 6. think experience positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 7. act experience positively but insignificantly influence brand image. 8. relate experience positively and significantly influence brand image.According to the results of this research, I have eight practical managerial suggestions for starbucks 1. to place importance on educational training of employees. 2. to develop diversification products. 3. to emphasize the symbol of brand. 4. to intensify the atmosphere of the store. 5. to pay attention on the feelings of consumers. 6. to integrate the popular products. 7. to improve the system of VIP. 8. to hold the experiential camp of coffee and reading.
