企業資訊系統委外關鍵成功因素之研究
A Study on Critical Success Factors of Corporate Information Systems Outsourcing
資訊系統委外、關鍵成功因素、資訊系統成功
資訊系統委外現已成為企業改善資訊科技投資報酬率、減少人力、減少資金投入與有效運用先進技術，以增進企業因應環境變遷之重要方法。從過去的支援性工作，至今已成為企業競爭策略的一部份。就實務面而言，資訊系統委外服務仍有層出不窮的問題，如何提高資訊系統委外成功之機會應是企業所關心之重要課題。本研究透過文獻探討，彙整資訊系統委外因素以及資訊系統成功之衡量構面，藉由個案研究，訪談六家不同行業別企業的資訊系統委外成功經驗，分析資訊系統委外因素與資訊系統成功之關聯，找出資訊系統委外的關鍵成功因素，最後發展出相關的命題作為實務參考，研究結論如下一、發包商清楚委外目標及高階主管支持的程度較高，則資訊系統委外的成效將較高。二、承包商瞭解專案目標及具備先進技術能力的程度，與委外系統的系統品質有正相關性。三、承包商的產業知識及投入的人力資源，與委外系統的服務品質有顯著相關性。四、專案成員對企業流程、資訊技術與專案管理的暸解程度，與系統使用者滿意度及專案時程滿意度有顯著相關性。五、發包商對委外系統需求不明確及承包商的產業知識缺乏，則資訊系統委外的成效將較低。
Information Systems (IS) outsourcing has already become the important method for enterprises to improve the rate of returns of IT investments, reduce manpower, reduce capital investment, use advanced technology effectively, and handle environmental changes. IS outsourcing, from its past supportive nature, has already become a part of enterprise's competitive strategy so far. In fact, IS outsourcing still has many issues. It should be the important issues that enterprises concern about how to improve the chance to succeed in IS outsourcing.This study is based on literatures review to determine the IS outsourcing factors and the information system success factors. This study conducts field interviews on six different industry companies in Taiwan. Through case study on corporate implementing IS outsourcing successfully, this study analyzes the IS outsourcing factors, the information system success factors as well as their relation, and finds out the critical success factors of IS outsourcing. The following points are concluded for the references in practice1. With outsourcing client understands the objective well and its top management’s support is relatively high, its IS outsourcing will be more effective.2. The outsourcer’s understanding of client’s outsourcing objective and its degree of advanced technical skills are positively related with the system quality of outsourcing.3. Outsourcer's domain knowledge and human resources are significantly related with the system service quality.4. Project team member's understanding degree to enterprise's business process, information technology and project management, may affect the users satisfaction and time satisfaction.5. With outsourcing client’s vague specification and outsourcer’s lacking domain knowledge, IS outsourcing will be relatively less effective.
