併購訊號、成長相對價值與股價績效表現之研究
The Relative Value of Growth  and Stock Price Return on The Signal of Merger or Acquisition
RVG指標、價值股、成長股、合併與收購、事件研究法
本文以上市櫃公司為樣本，探討不同成長相對價值 (Relative Value of Growth, RVG)指標之公司在面臨購併成長訊號時，其股價異常報酬表現是否有顯著差異。另外文中亦採用P B指標，作為成長股與價值股之分類依據，同樣探討公司購併成長訊號發布時對高低P B指標公司之股價異常報酬，是否有顯著差異；最後再比較當公司有購併成長事件發生時RVG指標或P B指標何者較具投資意涵。實證結果顯示：1、樣本公司群之RVG值與P B值間之相關係數為0.1264，相關性並不高；間接隱含前述二指標為價值股與成長股不同分類方式。2、當公司面臨購併成長訊號時高RVG值股在三日、五日或七日方面的報酬是屬於正向的表現，尤以三日的平均異常報酬率顯著大於0；而低RVG值股，不論在三日、五日或七日之平均異常報酬率皆為負向，但未達小於0的顯著水準；然而針對高低RVG族群做比較，高RVG值股三日及五日之平均異常報酬率都顯著大於低RVG值股之同天期平均異常報酬率。3、當公司面臨購併成長訊號時，以P B值為分類依據無法得到高P B值公司各天期股價異常報酬率為正，而低P B值其各天期股價異常報酬率為負之結果，同時高P B值各天期的平均異常報酬率也非顯著高於低P B值之同天期平均異常報酬率。綜合上列之說明，隱含著當公司發布合併與收購的成長訊號時，以其RVG指標高低做為投資該公司股票與否之依據，相對傳統P B值的分類方式更具投資意涵。
This study discusses the stocks which are issued in the market and classified by RVG ratio as an indication, and investigates whether the stock price return will be significant different when the signal of merge and acquisition are happened.We also compare with the significant difference of performance between these two groups based on P B ratio. Finally, we will discuss while M&A event is declared which classification is useful.The results of this study are summarized as bellow：1. The coefficient of correlation between P B ratio and RVG ratio is 0.1264. The linear relationship is not very strong. It means these two classification is different.2. When companies within different RVG ratio receive the M&A growth signal, the stock price return of high RVG group is positive. Especially, there is strong evidence that the average abnormal return of three days is significantly greater than 0. For high RVG group, investors will give the positive response of the huge growth of sales. On the other hand, the stock price return of low RVG group is negative. There is strong evidence to conclude that the stock price return will be significant difference between high RVG and low RVG during the event period.3. The result is that the stock price return of high P B group is not positive and low P B group is not negative exactly when M&A event is happened. There is not strong evidence of a significant relationship between the return of value stocks and growth stocks based on P B ratio when the M&A event is happened.Altogether, when the M&A event is declared the classification based on RVG ratio can be more accurate in calculating the stock return rather than P E ratio. It is more useful for investors.
