來台旅客參與觀光旅遊線之消費型態研究
A Study of Consume Manners on Tour Routes of Inbound Visitors in Taiwan
旅遊線 消費型態 滿意度 多項羅吉斯迴歸 Ridit CHAID
近年來隨著全球經濟的蓬勃發展，加上資訊傳播的迅速及交通運輸工具的便捷，促使全球觀光產業迅速發展。台灣觀光局近年來也積極推動「觀光倍增計畫」，規劃許多「套裝旅遊線」，希望達成觀光客倍增的目標。因此，本研究針對2004年來台旅客參與各旅遊線的情形作一探討，希望了解影響來台旅客參與各旅遊線的因素，以及參與各旅遊線之旅客的觀光形象滿意度及消費情形。最後針對旅客參與旅遊線之情形做一特性分析。    本研究結果發現，來台旅客之居住地、來台月份、來台主要目的、旅行方式及年齡等因素會影響來台旅客參與之旅遊線。透過旅行社包辦旅遊行程或代訂機票及住宿之香港.澳門旅客，參與北部海岸旅遊線之比例較其他旅客組合高；1-5月及9月份來台之美國、加拿大、法國或德國旅客，參與恆春半島旅遊線之比例則較其他旅客組合高；60歲以上之日本旅客則以參與日月潭旅遊線之比例較高。另外，在消費金額方面，停留夜數較長者，其平均每人每日消費金額較低。參與北部海岸旅遊線、日月潭旅遊線及花東旅遊線之旅客，消費型態偏向中、高消費；參與恆春半島旅遊線及其他旅遊線者則偏向低消費。就滿意度方面而言，大部分旅客均以台灣民眾態度友善為最滿意、其次為住宿設施良好，最不滿意者為環境衛生良好。    此外，就旅客參與旅遊線之特性分析方面，12-49歲且自行安排旅遊行程之日本、新加坡、馬來西亞、亞洲其他地區、英國及歐洲其他地區旅客，參與北部海岸旅遊線及恆春半島旅遊線之機率明顯高於日月潭旅遊線；50歲以上並透過旅行社安排活動行程或代訂機票及住宿之日本、韓國、印尼、紐澳及中國大陸旅客，參與北部海岸旅遊線及日月潭旅遊線之機率明顯高於花東旅遊線；而50歲以上之新加坡、馬來西亞、亞洲其他地區、英國、歐洲其他地區、美國、加拿大、法國及德國觀光旅客，則以參與北部海岸旅遊線及恆春半島旅遊線之機率明顯高於花東旅遊線。
Recently, with the blooming of global economy, plus the rapid spread of information and convenient transportations, the global tourism industry thrives. Taiwan Tourism Bureau had been pushing the “Doubling Tourist Arrivals Plan” and planned several packages of tour routes in order to double the number of tourist arrivals. Therefore, this research focus on the facts that affect the tourists’ choices of different tour routes, their level of satisfactions in tourism images and their expenditure and, at the end, analyzing the characteristics of the phenomenon in the tourists’ choices of different tour routes.The results of this research show that the tourists’ resident, the month they come to Taiwan, primary purpose, the way they travel, and their age are the variables that affect the tour routes they participate in. Tourists from Macau and Hong-Kong, who schedule their trip or flights and hotels through travel agencies, tend to take part in North Coast tour route more when compare to other tourists. The ratio of American, Canadian, Frenchman and German tourists, who come around January to May and September, joining the Henhchun Peninsula tour route is higher than other groups. Also, the ratio of Japanese tourists above the age of 60 joining the Sun Moon Lake tour route is higher than other groups. In terms of their expenditure, the longer the tourists stay in Taiwan the less they spent per day. Tourists who participate in the North Coast tour route, Sun Moon Lake tour route and Hualien-Taitung tour route have high level of expenditure. In the other hand, tourists who participate in the Hengchun Peninsula and other tour routes have low level of expenditure. And, when being questioned on the level of satisfactions, the tourists are most satisfied with “Friendliness of Taiwan People” and “Accommodation facilities”, but most dissatisfied with “Environmental sanitation".Also, the analysis on the characteristic of tourists’ choices of different tour routes shows that the tourists from Japan, Singapore, Malaysia, other areas in Asia, Great Britain and other parts of Europe, with age of 12~49, who arrange trip by themselves, have higher probability to go to the North Coast tour route and Hengchun Peninsula tour route than Sun Moon Lake tour route. Those above the age of 50, from Japan, Korea, Indonesia, New Zealand, Australia, and China, who schedule their trip or flights and hotels through travel agencies, have higher probability to choose the North Coast tour route and Sun Moon Lake tour route than Hualien-Taitung tour route.  While tourists above the age of 50, from Singapore, Malaysia, other areas in Asia, Great Britain, other areas in Europe, the United States, Canada, France and Germany tend to join the North Coast tour route and Hengchun Peninsula tour route than Hualien-Taitung tour route.
