供應商與買方合作關係持續性影響因素之探討--以台灣紡織成衣業為例
A Study of Determining Factors on the Continuity of Cooperation between Suppliers and Buyers–An Example of Taiwan Textiles and Apparel Industry
合作關係持續性、全球競爭、資源基礎理論、交易成本、關係品質
供應商與買方合作關係的持續性在實務與理論上是一個值得研究的課題。它能幫助廠商了解如何持續合作關係和造成關係終止的理由。以實務面而言，以台灣紡織成衣業目前在面臨國際競爭、開發中國家的低人力成本致使國內廠商紛紛外移大陸，因此廠商間維持良好合作關係至關重要；而就理論而言，對於影響供應商與買方間長期合作關係因素之研究仍屬不足。因此，本研究欲探討供應商與買方合作關係持續之影響因素，並進一步找出合作關係持續的模式。    本文以合作理論、資源基礎理論、交易成本理論和關係行銷理論為架構，並針對台灣紡織成衣業廠商進行實證調查，對回收問卷之110家廠商進行LISREL分析，以瞭解影響合作關係持續之相關變數對合作關係持續性之間接與直接影響的程度，透過實證的結果發現：一、供應商競爭力、轉換成本和環境不確定等因素對供應商與買方合作關係持續    性的影響並不顯著。二、關係品質對供應商與買方合作關係持續性有正向顯著影響。三、轉換成本會透過關係品質而間接影響供應商與買方合作關係持續性。    本研究發現關係品質顯著影響合作關係及其持續性，因此對以中小企業為主的台灣紡織成衣業有著重大的策略意涵。
The continuity of cooperation between supplier and buyer is an important research issue no matter on practical or theoretic aspects. It is valuable for firms to understand how to continue cooperation and what are the reasons for ceasing the cooperation. From the practical aspect, global competition, low labor cost from developing countries have forced many manufacturers moved to mainland China, especially for Taiwan textiles and apparel industry. Therefore, it’s quite critical for firms to keep good relationship with suppliers. From the theoretical perspective, related researches in this issue are not sufficient and worthwhile investigating.    The purpose of this study is to investigate the related factors that influence the continuity of cooperation between suppliers and buyers. This study uses cooperation, resource-based, switching cost and relationship marketing theories for theoretical framework to investigate firms from Taiwan textiles and apparel industry. LISREL analysis is used to analyze the 110 sample firms to find out the direct and indirect extent of related variables that influence the continuity of cooperation by using. Results of this research indicate that：1.The effects of supplier’s competition, switching cost, and environment uncertainties for the continuity of cooperation between suppliers and buyers are all not significant.2.Relationship quality has a significantly positive effect on the continuity of cooperation between suppliers and buyers.3.Switching cost has a mediate effect on the continuity of cooperation between suppliers and buyers through relationship quality.These results provide aspect into the continuity of cooperation between suppliers and buyers, especially for most small and medium enterprises in Taiwan textiles and apparel industry.
