保健食品之競爭策略-以特殊營養品為例
The competitive strategy of health food – take nutritional supplements as an example
保健食品、競爭策略、消費者行為

近年來，許多傳統食品與製藥公司挾著多角化經營的競爭優勢，率先進入保健食品市場，保健食品的戰國時代就此展開。本研究目的是要探討保健食品產業的發展趨勢現況與保健食品的消費者行為，同時並對特殊營養品產業進行競爭分析及制定特殊營養品之競爭策略。首先整理國內外保健食品和競爭策略有關的參考文獻，作為本論文發展理論架構之基礎。接著採用個案研究法，專訪三家保健食品公司，將保健食品的競爭策略作一分析比較。研究發現企業會依據自身能力考量，以及消費者行為影響，在不同生命週期，制定不同的競爭策略，創造持續性的競爭優勢。本研究可作為對保健食品產業競爭策略分析進行深入探討的基礎，且可提供台灣保健食品廠商參考，制定公司之競爭策略。
Recent years, many traditional food and pharmaceutical companies in Taiwan are benefit from their existing multi-field advantages diversifying into health food business. Taiwan health food industry is yet launched.The purpose of this research is to study the actual state, development trend, consumer behavior, and competitive strategy of health food industry. To achieve this goal, the health food company specialized in special nourishment is chosen as an example for detail analysis to draw up the business development competitive strategy of this industry.The methods used for this study, first of all, is to structure the fundamental theory by collected, reviewed, analyzed, integrated and concluded the domestic and overseas references related to health food, consumer behavior, as well as competitive strategy. Then three companies, who are the world leads in special nourishment business, are selected as case studies. A template questionnaire with ten questions is designed for interviewing three high rank managers. Their company mission, core value, vision, structure, product development strategy, marketing strategy, product market positioning, performance evaluation, factors for a successful product, elements affect consumer behavior are asked and documented. After careful comparison and analysis, this research finds that enterprise usually considers its self-capability, and is affected by consumer behavior to formulate different competitive strategy at different product life cycle to maintain constant competitive advantage.Result from this research could be the foundation provides helpful suggestions for health food companies in Taiwan when decided further expand or address them to this business. It also contributes to the scheming of their competitive strategy, to enhance their competitiveness when facing future market competition.
