個人轉寄網路連鎖信之影響因素研究
The Study of Influencing Factors in Chain Email Forwarding Behavior
網路連鎖信、垃圾信防治、理性行為理論、轉寄行為
隨著社會發展，網路使用已十分普及，電子郵件也成為工作與人際維持上不可或缺之工具，然而，垃圾信的問題卻越來越嚴重，而網路連鎖信也是其中的一種。傳散網路連鎖信不但浪費頻寬、破壞人際關係，還對國內外許多企業帶來困擾。值得注意的是，早期的網路連鎖信多半為假，如今卻已有廠商以此種方式進行行銷活動，或是有家屬以此來尋求協助。而且，網路連鎖信有朝向即時通、部落格、手機發展的跡象，但國內外研究卻付之闕如，因此本研究以理性行為理論作為基礎，並從一般轉寄郵件研究、網路謠言研究、病毒行銷之電子郵件研究中歸納出可能影響轉寄的因素，來對網路連鎖信轉寄行為進行多變項的探討。    研究結果指出，一般人對於網路連鎖信多呈負面態度，且不太願意轉寄。迴歸的結果指出，消息來源可信度越高、訊息可信度越高、訊息新奇性越高、收到網路連鎖信的頻率越低、網齡越低，會有越佳的網路連鎖信轉寄態度。至於個人態度、他人看法、動機皆會對網路連鎖信轉寄意願造成影響，但動機的預測力最高。希冀未來有更多研究者投入網路連鎖信的研究，以期能減緩垃圾信氾濫的問題。
With social development, using Internet becomes more and more universal. Email also turns into an indispensable tool for work and relation maintenance. However, the problem of junk emails is getting more and more serious. And chain email is one kind of junk emails. Forwarding chain email not only wastes bandwidth and hurtsrelationship, but also disturbs many enterprises. What's we should pay attention is, chain emails are false in the past, but now many enterprises use them to do the marketing and some family members even use them to seek help from the others. Moreover, the form of chain emails starts to spread into the environment of instant messenger, blog, and mobile phone. However, both domestic and foreign researches are scanty. So my research take Theory ofReasoned Action as the basis theory, and Generalize influencing factors from general email research, Internet humor research, as well as advertising email in viral marketing. And then using these factors to study chain email forwarding behavior.    The research reveals that people usually hold negative attitude towards chain emails and they are not willing to forward them. The result of multiple regression points out that high source credibility,high message credibility, high message novelty, low receiving frequency, low net age lead to positive forwarding attitude.Personal attitude, important others’viewpoint, and forwarding motive will influence chain email forwarding willingness. And motive is the most important predicting factor among them.
