六標準差在金融業的運用－以A銀行為例
An Exploratory Study on the Financial Effects of Banking Processes Reengineering under Six Sigma Project
品質改善、六標準差、摩托羅拉、奇異
企業面臨現實的競爭環境，唯一不變的事情就是「變」，因此，企業經理人為求生存，無不竭盡心力思索企業生存之道。摩托羅拉(Motorola Inc.)於1980年代中期，遭逢亞洲企業日與劇增的競爭壓力，管理階層痛定思痛，決定由通訊事業群製造流程著手，推出六標準差流程，訂定5年內挑戰企業績效提高10倍的經營策略，以迎擊競爭對手。在六標準差理論的成就對於摩托羅拉來說，具有重大的意義，因為摩托羅拉由於採行六標準差的成就而獲得1988年美國品質獎。為了宣揚六標準差理論，摩托羅拉更斥資成立摩托羅拉大學，提供企業界六標準差理論相關的完整訓練課程及顧問服務。在1987-1997的十年間，推動摩托羅拉六標準差改革方案，每年銷售成長五倍、淨利成長近20％、節省成本達140億美元、股價每年成長21.3％。與摩托羅拉大學合作中，奇異公司(GE Electric)的前任執行長傑克‧威爾許（Jack Welch）是六標準差理論的狂熱擁護者，他除了提供六標準差理論相關的顧問服務以外，更將六標準差理論發揚光大。奇異公司在他的帶領下，將六標準差的訓練及目標與人事升遷制度相結合，在奇異公司內部，接受過黑帶(Black Belt)的訓練課程是拔擢為管理階層的必要條件，該公司40%的盈餘分紅則取決於六標準差專案的目標達成與否。這一項變革使得奇異的營運毛利率自1995年的13.5％，成長至1998年的16.7％，更在1999年替奇異撙節達十億美元的支出，並讓奇異的每家子公司都成為同業中的翹楚！今天，六標準差理論已被許多大跨國組織廣泛採用，推動提升顧客滿意度的品質活動。本論文藉由實際參與六標準差專案進行探討，歸納六標準差理論之所以能夠受到注目，迥異於過去的品質管理活動，主要的原因如下：一、  六標準差是一種從上而下（Top-Down）的品質管理理論。二、  六標準差著重在品質管理與財務效益的緊密結合。三、  六標準差是高度重視資料數據的品質管理理論。四、  六標準差採取嚴謹的組織架構。
In 21 century, the dramatic business environment changes rapidly worldwide, business therefore has to face more and more crucial competition than used to be. An entrepreneur has to figure out the philosophy how to survival.In order to oppose against the competitor from Asian enterprise in mid-1980, Motorola Inc was starting in the firm’s Communications Sector to aim at 10 times quality improvement and was quickly popularized company-wide by the CEO. As a result, in 1988 Motorola became the first company to win the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award. Within a decade (1987~1997), Motorola adopted the methodology to implement inner process achieving 5 times sales goal, 20% revenue grown per year, financial saving more than USD 14 billion, and 21.3% share price grown per year. It continues to be a leader in Six Sigma, particularly through its Motorola University, which provides advisory and training services to other organizations looking to implement Six Sigma.However, the company most frequently associated with Six Sigma is probably General Electric. GE’s former CEO, Jack Welch, is a passionate advocate and provides consulting services related to Six Sigma. The company has also pegged compensation and advancement to Six Sigma training levels and goals. Six Sigma“Black Belt” training is required for a promotion to management and 40% of top management bonuses are tied to Six Sigma goals. In response to the successful of Six Sigma program, GE’s gross margin increased to 16.7% in 1998 from 13.5% in 1995, furthermore, the financial saving achieved billions in 1999.Today, many of international firms use Six Sigma that seeks to improve quality from the perspective of the customer. Through the participation in Six Sigma projects practices of internationally active bank, this paper discusses the processes of project and demonstrate the estimated “Hard Saving” and “Soft Saving” after fine-tuned the process, with a hope that the methodology will provide succeeding banks a clear picture and reference in their endeavor toward fulfilling the business requirements. Major conclusions of why Six Sigma project can be successfully adopted and embrace by several famous enterprises rather than past quality management methodology are summarized as follows1.  Six Sigma is a top-down methodology.2.  Six Sigma is developed for establishing close integration between quality management and financial effect that extracts many of business adapting the specific methodology.3.  Six Sigma is a highly structured, phased approach built around rigorous metrics and statistical analysis.4.  Six Sigma incorporates a robust Control phase and tools such as "dashboards" to maintain long-term improvement.
