分行出售對公司財務結構與經營效率之影響-以國內單一銀行為例
The Effects of Divestiture on Corporate Financial Structure and OperatingPerformance  the Evidence of a Domestic Bank
分行出售、財務結構、經營效率、財務指標

摘要依現行國內十四家金控來看，不論是以銀行為主體，如第一金控和華南金控；或是以保險為主體者，如國泰金控及新光金控等；或是其他以票券公司為主幹的金控如國票金控，除開發金控以投資銀行見長外，餘金控/銀行莫不積極找尋銀行為併購對象，以擴大市場佔有率並延伸既有或是擴增銀行的通路。而以消費金融為主力的台灣市場而言，分行一直是金融整併的重點之一。據麥肯鍚估計：八成的個金商品銷售和四成成本都是直接由分行產生，其原因除分行仍是經辦個人零售、財富管理及中小企業金融相關業務的主要場所外，分行的便利性亦是消費者選擇銀行的關鍵因素。但在政府宣示凍結新設分行的政策下，金控及銀行為擴增通路布局及營運據點和擴大存、放款的考量下，藉由併購手段擴張據點似乎成了在消費金融業務為主流的台灣市場下的唯一出路。分行的併購價值可說是來自於因其地點的便利優勢，而能在有利潤的小眾市場中產生足夠的吸引力，也就是說分行的營業執照是否可移轉，對於分行的價值，有相當的影響力。以玉山金控併購高雄企銀為例，玉山金控在得標後，因其中有分行可自由遷移，故玉山金控逐步將原高雄企銀位於南台灣績效及地點較差的分行關掉，而將之遷移至對業績營收有貢獻的地區。綜上所述，受國內銀行購併市場的熱絡情形的影響下，暗示著將來在大型金控及銀行為提升本身的規模經濟，及中小型金控及銀行為維持其既有的優勢下，金控及銀行對於併購他銀行將愈來愈積極，而購併標的的價格也將愈炒愈高。以銀行營業項目分析，除傳統之存放業務外，消費及理財服務因受到經濟及環境變遷之影響，越來越受到消費大眾之重視，各家銀行亦積極發展相關業務。而依據國人傳統消費習慣，消費者於選擇服務銀行時，除考量銀行商譽、分行家數及業務種類是否一次滿足消費者所有需求外，地點便利性亦是重要考量項目之一。因此，各家銀行如欲在國內金融版圖立於優勢地位者，莫不積極爭取整併機會以取得營業據點及市場版圖，而讓售之分行執照亦成各家銀行積極爭取之對象。本研究主要是針對目前由存款保險公司所輔導的個案，就其年度資本改善計畫項下之〝出售分行〞專案評估其可行性。相關數據的取得僅係銀行就該計畫由各處室依業務執掌所作的內部估算，並未經會計師簽核。雖然是基於一定財務假設下的評估，但是仍對於銀行經營層決策出售分行的可行性提供了有系統的評估模式。
AbstractTo go by the existing fourteen local financial holding firms, regardless whether the bank-based entities, such as First Financial Holding and Hwa Nan Financial Holding, or insurance-based entities, such as Cathay Financial Holding and Shin Kong Financial Holding and such, or other notes-based financial holdings, such as National Notes Financial Holding, except the financial holding firms that are keen on investing in banks, the rest of the financial holding conglomerates and banks have been actively searching for potential merger subjects in order to expand their market share and expand their presence, as well as expanding the banking network.In the Taiwan market dominated by consumer banking, branch merging has always been a focal point in financial merging, which according to McKenzie’s estimations, some eighty percent of sale in financial products and forty percent of cost have been generated by branches. Which can largely be attributed to that branches not only remain a major venue for consumer retailing, wealth management and medium and small business related services, but the convenience a branch offers continues to be a determining factor in how the consumer chooses a bank.Yet under the government’s announcement of a branch launching freezing policy, the tendency for financial holdings and banks, in search of expanding their distribution presence, business outlets and expanding their deposit and loan operations, to turned to the means of merger and acquisition has emerged to become a sole survival tactic in the consumer banking-dominated Taiwan market.  The value of branch merging can be said to stem from a locale convenience advantage to offer sufficient draw in the profitable macro market, meaning the transferability of a branch license exerts a significant influence of the value of a branch.  Take for the example of Sun Financial Holding’s merging Kaohsiung Business Bank, Sun Financial Holding, upon securing the bid, benefits from some of the branches that cannot be freely relocated, hence prompting Sun Financial Holding to gradually close down the former Kaohsiung Business Bank branches with a poorer performance and location in southern Taiwan, and moving them to areas that contribute to operating revenue.Recapping the above, as influenced by the rush in the local bank merging sector, which suggests that in the future, large-scale financial holding firms, in a move to bring up their economic scales, and in response to medium and smaller scale financial holding firms and banks looking to maintain their existing advantages, financial holding firms and banks will be more keen to merge other banks, and that the cost of merging will become higher.To analyze by bank operating categories, besides the conventional deposit loan services, consumer banking and money management, as hindered by changes in the economy and social environment, are garnering widespread attention by the consumers, prompting all banks to actively explore related services.  To go by the local residents’ banking habits, a consumer, when choosing a service bank, tends to focus not only whether the bank’s reputation, branch number and service varieties are able to satisfy the consumer’s one-stop shopping needs, yet location convenience remains one of the crucial considerations.  As a result, banks that looking to instill an advantageous footing in the local banking sector are rushing to actively explore the niche opportunities merger provides in order to expand their business outlets and market presence, propelling transferable branch licenses to be a hot property much sought after by all banks.The study aims to assess the feasibility of branch for sale proposals under the yearly capital improvement plan by focusing on cases that are currently under counseling by the Depository Insurance Corporation.  Relevant figures have derived from the selected banks’ internal estimations by various divisions and offices in charge of the project, but without CPA authentication.  Regardless that the assessment has been concluded based on certain financial hypotheses, it however offers a systematic evaluation model for assessing the feasibility of the management’s decision to sell off branches.
