利率風險與匯率風險對銀行業股價報酬之影響
The Effects of Interest Rate Risk and Exchange Rate Risk on Stock Return in Taiwan's Banking Industry
利率風險、匯率風險、銀行業股價報酬
利率風險及匯率風險皆屬於市場風險，因未來市場價值變動而使金融機構所持有交易部位之市場價值遭遇損失之風險。利率及匯率自由化後，金融機構的經營環境面臨到急速變遷與激烈競爭的挑戰。本研究主要目地在了解利率風險與匯率風險對銀行業股價報酬的影響，採用panel estimation，分四個時期分別探討1.利率風險對銀行業股價報酬的影響。2.匯率風險對銀行業股價報酬的影響。3.同時受到利率風險、匯率風險影響下，對銀行業股價報酬是否呈現差異性的變化。實證結果發現：一、針對股票市場報酬對銀行業股價報酬的影響，可以發現在四個時期都呈顯著的正相關，即市場報酬越高，則顯著增加銀行業股價報酬。二、利率風險對銀行業股價報酬的影響，不管是在那一時期，皆呈負向影響，表示在利率變動上升則銀行業股價報酬會下降。在利率自由化前(民國74-84年) ，利率風險對銀行業股價報酬呈不顯著的負相關，在利率自由化後(民國85-90年) ，利率風險對銀行業股價報酬呈顯著的負相關，利率自由化後的相關係數也大於利率自由化前。三、匯率風險對銀行業股價報酬的影響，匯率自由化前(民國74-84年)，呈不顯著的負相關，在匯率自由化後(民國91-94年)呈顯著的負相關，匯率自由化後的相關係數也大於匯率自由化前，表示當匯率是貶值時，則銀行業股價報酬會下降，政府開放新銀行設立後(民國85-90年)，匯率風險對銀行業股價報酬在5%顯著水準下呈正相關，與本研究預期不同，此時期可能是因為1.匯率自由化後有落後期。2.新銀行剛成立。尚未受到匯率風險的影響，3.再加上整體經濟因素影響。四、一般傳統的最小平方法(OLS) ，只能分別估計縱斷面或橫斷面的資料，並不能將兩者混在一起估計，本研究採用Panel Data，同時估計縱斷面及橫斷面，發現在利率與匯率自由化的環境下，銀行業股價報酬同時到利率風險及匯率風險會使銀行業面臨的風險增加。
Interest rate risk and exchange rate risk could both be regarded as market risks.  They are risks faced by financial institutions due to fluctuations in the market values of their trading positions. After deregulation on interest rates and exchange rates, the operations of the financial institutions are challenged by drastic changes and mounting competition. The focus of my research is to unravel the influence of interest rate risk and exchange rate risk on the stock returns of the banking industry. The method for this research is adopting panel estimation on three important factors through out four separate periods. These factors are (1) the influence of interest rate risk upon the stock returns of the entire banking industry, (2) the influence of exchange rate risk on the stock returns of the entire banking industry, and (3) the influence exerted by concurrence of interest rate risk and exchange rate risk on the stock returns of the overall banking industry. My findings are as follows. (1) There is significantly positive correlation between overall stock market returns and the stock returns of the banking industry in all of the four periods under discussion.  That is, the higher the market returns, the better the stock returns of the banking industry. (2) There is negative correlation between interest rate risk and the stock returns of the banking industry in all of the four periods under discussion.  That is, an increase in interest rates will result in a decrease in the stock returns.  Moreover, the correlation is insignificantly negative before the deregulation on interest rates from 1985 to 1995.  However, the negative correlation turns significant after the deregulation on interest rates from 1996 till 2000.  It is also evidenced that the coefficient is larger in the latter period than that in the former.  (3) There is also a negative correlation between exchange rate risk and the stock returns of the banking industry in all of the four periods under discussion. Furthermore, the correlation is insignificantly negative before the deregulation on exchange rates from 1985 to 1995. However, the negative correlation becomes significant after the deregulation on exchange rates from 2002 till 2005. It is also true that the coefficient is larger in the latter period than that in the former, implying that the depreciation of the currency will bring about downward movement in the stock returns of the banking industry.  It is noteworthy that the correlation between exchange rate risk and the stock returns of the banking industry between 1996 and 2000, accompanied by opening up the initiation of banks, appears to be positive with 5% significance.  Causes for this finding could include (i) a lag caused by the deregulation, (ii) hardly any impact of exchange rate risk having been observed at the early stage of any new banks, (iii) the influence of economy as a whole.  (4) OLS cannot estimate both profile data and transaction data at the same time, but panel estimation can. By using panel estimation, it has been found that under the deregulated circumstances, the influence exerted by concurrence of interest rate risk and exchange rate risk on the stock returns of the banking industry pushes the banking industry to bear more risks.
