利用CART分類與迴歸樹建立消費者信用貸款違約風險評估模型之研究-以國內A銀行為例
A Study of Default Risk Model of Consume Credit Loan Using CART（Classification and Regression Tree） With Bank A in Taiwan as an Example
消費者信用貸款、違約風險、預期違約機率、分類與迴歸樹、銀行家數、迴歸樹、總金額、信用卡、誤判率
銀行界近年來積極著手引進及規劃實施巴塞爾資本協定，並逐漸調整內部系統，以符合要求。另外，銀行除了本身所擁有的顧客資料外，尚可透過聯合徵信中心（JCIC）取得相關顧客信用資料，所以各家銀行都積極的在建立違約風險模型以便計算違約風險分數，進而按其風險之大小建立評等，以區辨出銀行所面臨的顧客風險大小，降低銀行的違約損失。而如何利用相關顧客信用資料建立適切的違約風險評估模型，亦為本研究之重點所在。因此，本研究欲利用CART分類與迴歸樹分析方法建立消費者信用貸款違約風險評估模型，找出重要之影響變數，並將模型所預測分類出之預期違約機率作一最適切點之判定研究。研究結果顯示，本研究所建構之六種決策樹模型，經由模型在六種預測能力指標(整體預測正確率、壞帳預測率、好帳誤判率、好帳預測率、壞帳誤判率與模型預測壞帳精確率)、ROC曲線與Cumulative Lift曲線之綜合比較結果，決定以「壞帳相關程度法-決策樹」為本研究較適之模型。「壞帳相關程度法-決策樹」中所包含之重要變數，共計八個，分別為「性別」、「學歷」、「現任公司地址（縣市）」、「最近三個月他行查詢銀行家數」、「信用總額度與總掛帳總金額的差值」、「過去N月全額繳清次數比率」、「具預借現金的信用卡張數」與「平均信用額度」；該模型最大深度為十層而最終葉子節點數為二十六個，最適預期違約機率切點則落在0.2316（23.16%）。
In recent years, the bank industry actively introduce and plan to practice the Basel Ⅱ and adjust the inside system gradually. Banks except itself had consume private liability variables, also taken the relevant consume situation of credit from JCIC. Banks actively set up default risk model in order to calculate default risk’s score and then set up and comment etc. In order to distinguishes from the size of customer's risk and reduce the loss. Then how to set up appropriate default risk models is also the key of this research.    The objective of this research is to find consume private liability variables and relation of individual credit variables which have significant influences on default, and to decide the suitable cut-point of probability of expect default of the consume credit loan default by using Classification and regression tree technique.    Result, this research sets up six kinds of evaluation models and finally determine “relation of bad – decision tree” is the better model by comparing six prediction abilities of model (Accuracy rate, Recall rate , FP rate, TN rate, FN rate and Precision rate ), ROC curve, and Cumulative Lift curve.    In “the relation of bad - decision tree” , the important eight variables are “gander”, “education levels”, “the address of company (city)”, “inquire of other banks last three months”, “difference of total credit and total loan”, “the rate of times fully pay up last N months”, “the number of credit cards could borrow money”, “the average of credit”, etc. The decision tree that had ten levels and twenty-six nodes cut-point is 23.16% with the suitable probability of expect default.
