創新產品發展專案管理－以PMP產品為例
Project Management of Innovative Product Development – PMP Product as an Example
創新產品、新產品發展、專案管理
現今科技發展的腳步日益快速，產品的生命週期日漸縮短，如果企業想要永續經營，就必須跟得上產業界的流行，甚至快過市場新產品更新的速度。因此，對企業來說，發展新產品是刻不容緩的。本研究以廣義的角度探討自新產品概念形成後，如何分析評估其可行性。主要的評估方式有市場評估、技術評估、財務評估以及風險評估，當新產品發展可行後，才可針對此產品成立專案發展。在專案管理方面，對專案人力資源、設計研發、業務行銷、採購生產與財務等五個構面所產生的各項活動加以詮釋，且於第五章以PMP (Portable Multimedia Player)新產品個案輔助說明，將理論與實務得以相互驗證。本研究透過文獻探討與實務上的經驗，對新產品評估與發展做出較不同於以往的見解。新產品創新發展猶如為企業注入一股新的動力，正確的評估與了解新產品發展程序，不但可以縮短摸索期，也提高新產品上市成功的機率。本研究的主要貢獻即在此，期望能為企業提供有效的參考。
Nowadays the development of science and technology makes great and fast progress. But the life cycle of product is increasingly shortening. If the enterprise wants to be alive forever, it must catch up with the fashion of industry or move faster than the new product in the market. Therefore, it is urgent and important for the enterprise to develop the new product.This study explores from a board perspective how to evaluate if the new product is practical since the concept emerges. The main way is the evaluation of market, technology, finance and risk. After we are sure the new product is workable, we can plan the development project.The project management is based on the activities from the five aspects, human resource, research and development, sale and market, purchase and production, and finance. It is supported and illustrated with the new product of PMP (Portable Multimedia Player) on the Chapter 5. Then the theory will be verified with the real case each other.This study results in the different point of view on the evaluation and development of the new product after researching on the relative papers and facts.The innovation of the new product will bring the new motivation to the enterprise. The correct evaluation and realization of the development procedure not only shorten the time to investigate the new product, but also enhance the change to market it successfully. This is what the study contributes to mainly. Hopefully it can be the useful reference to enterprise.
