創新產品購買意願的影響因素－以筆記型電腦為例
The influential factors of purchase intention on innovation product－Taking the Notebook as the example
消費者特性、新產品屬性、環境變數、創新購買意願、筆記型電腦

論文提要內容：本研究主要目的是想探討不同消費者特性、新產品屬性及環境變數對消費者購買資訊產品意願的影響，期望能對企業在行銷實務及產品研發上有所幫助。本研究以筆記型電腦為實證標的，採取便利抽樣，針對18歲以上的消費者進行問卷發放，共發放370份，回收370份，有效問卷343份，有效率達92.7%。研究結果發現消費者的人格特質、產品知識和風險態度與購買意願具有顯著關係；新產品的相容性與購買意願具有顯著關係；就環境變數而言，同儕關係與購買意願具有顯著關係。另外，本研究亦發現，針對已購買筆記型電腦的消費者做構面上的分析，發現到目前已購買的消費者在產品上均具有相當的知識，代表購買者主要來自於興趣者；而在新產品的設備上雖未在意追求相容性及相對優勢高者，但未來確是新產品購買意願的主要考量因素；而就環境變數而言，目前的購買行為均受到社會支持與同儕關係的強烈影響。
Abstract    This study aims to explore how consumer characteristics, the attributes of new products, and environment variables influence consumers’ willingness to purchase information products. It is hoped that this study will be beneficial for related businesses in terms of marketing practices and the research and development of new products.    The research objects and sampling method adopted in this study are laptops and convenience sampling. A total of 370 questionnaires have been given to consumers who are above the age of 18, and 370 have been retrieved. Among them, 343 questionnaires are effective, which results in an effective rate of 92.7%.    Research results show consumers’ characteristics, knowledge and risk attitude of the products and the compatibility and relative advantage of new products have significant influence on purchase intention. With regard to environment variables, peer relations also have considerable effects on purchase intention.    Moreover, through dimensional analysis of the consumers who have already purchased laptops, this study also found out that the type of consumers mentioned above always have profound knowledge of the products. Also, with regard to the attributes of new products, although consumers do not particularly desire to purchase products with high compatibility and relative advantage, the two attributes will become the main factors in the future to which consumers give consideration in deciding whether or not to purchase a new product. Last, with regard to environment variables, current purchase behaviors are strongly influenced by social support and peer relations.
