創投在不同階段投資策略之研究
The Research of Venture Capital Investment Strategy for Different Stages
創投事業、創投投資策略、創投評估計分卡

過去許多研究創投投資案決策及評估準則中，並未針對不同階段別和不同產業別的投資評估重點差異性進行比較分析。因此，本研究針對創投專業經理人進行有效專家問卷調查，比較產業別與階段別評估重點不同之差異性分析。本研究發現不同產業在各階段評估構面重視程度、同產業不同階段比較分析或同階段不同產業比較分析仍然有所差異性。有以下幾點發現：1.在「早期階段」不論是「半導體與光電」、「資通訊」、「電子相關」、「生物科技」其最重視評估構面的是「團隊」構面；2.在產業別中「生物科技」產業之評估準則與其他產業有明顯差異區別；3.在「早期階段」的評估指標會與「其他階段別」有明顯上的差異；4.在同階段不同產業比較分析中可發現，又以「電子相關產業」在「早期」、「發展期」、「成熟期」中所表現出的評估指標重視程度較其他產業為高。唯有在「退出階段」各產業的評估指標則差異性不大。本研究結果將提供國內創投公司就投資策略面、未來投資產業方向、在產業別與階段別不同給予投資評估重點差異之參考與建議。
The goal of this research is trying to utilize Bell Mason 12 dimensions diagnosis model to study Taiwan’s venture capital (VC) present situation in the investment evaluation of targets in different industries and stages. The results of this research will be used to set up venture capital effective investment evaluation score card.Questionnaire based on Bell Mason diagnosis model is designed. They are emailed to local VC mangers to collect their investment assessment criteria. Four important industries (Semiconductor/ Photonics, Information/ communication, Electronics, and Biotechnology) are chosen for this study. Each investment manager is asked only to answer this questionnaire for one industry she/he is good at. Answers from managers are compared, analyzed and the results are as follows1.  For early stage investment, the most important evaluation criterion in all four industries is people.2.  The assessment criteria for biotechnology investment are obviously different from other industries.3.  The investment evaluation benchmarks in early stage are apparently different from other stages.4.  For the comparative analysis of different industries at different stages, electronic industry especially can be found that, when in the early stage, development stage as well as late stage, the assessment index is higher than other industries except at exit stage.The results from this study could be applied for Taiwan VC companies as a meaningful guideline or reference when drawing up their future investment strategy for different industries at different stages.
