化學防護服材料之專利分析
Patent Analysis of Chemical Protective Clothing Materials
化學防護服、材料、專利分析、化學文摘登記號碼
夲研究分析從1980到2005年歐洲專利商標局(EPO)所收納之世界已核准及早期公開之化學防護服材料專利，以專利書目資料及化學文摘登記號碼分析化學防護服材料之技術分類與趨勢，並以專利獨立項與摘要分析化學防護材料專利的演變與最新化學防護服材料之應用。本研究之結論如下：    (一)在專利技術分類與趨勢方面：在專利材料分類特色上，以國際專利分類(IPC) B32B層狀產品最多。以專利數量來看，美國及德國為主要技術領先國，其中又以德國的技術獨立性較高；主要的競爭廠商為Bluecher、DU PONT與GORE公司。    (二)在化學防護服材料之種類與趨勢方面：從專利材料的化學文摘登記號碼來看，活性碳、PTFE聚四氟乙烯及聚乙烯為主要的應用材料。在2000年以後的碳材料更進一步結合奈米技術，以提升吸附能力；PTFE防護材料專利，則多強調防護服的透氣性及多功能性(能隔絕多項危害物質)。本研究並整理出專利中應用於化學防護服之新材料及其化學文摘登記號碼，包括有吸附材料、阻隔層材料、飛機用阻隔層材料(常溫處理)、高分子材料、架橋劑、分散劑、防火加工劑、黏著劑、提升耐久性材料、製作球型活性碳的反應物及生化解毒劑。    (三)在化學防護材料之關鍵材料因素與最新化學防護服材料之應用方面：本研究歸納出化學防護材料之關鍵材料因素有阻隔能力、吸附能力、解毒功能、穿著舒適性、材料強度(耐久性)及層狀結構；而在最新化學防護服材料之應用上，在兩千年之後的專利材料中我們可以發現以層狀結構結合多種材料達到多重防護效果的材料趨勢，同時奈米科技開始應用到化學防護材料上，防護材料正邁向重量更輕、強度更好、阻隔性更佳、由傳統的被動吸附到主動的消毒解毒功能，結合多層材料達到防化學危害、防輻射、防生物戰劑、防有害微生物的功能。
This study examined the issued and pre-granted patents of worldwide chemical protective clothing (CPC) materials. Time span and patent office were 1980 to 2005 and EPO, respectively. The purposes of the study were to analyze the technical trends and classifications of CPC material through bibliography and registry number (RN), and analyze the most development of CPC material in recent years. The conclusions of the study are as follows    First, in the analysis of patent classifications and technical trends, we found that the main international patent classification (IPC) was B32B, Layered Products. U.S. and German were the main technical pioneers in CPC material field. Compared to U.S., German had higher technical independency. The major assignees were Bluecher, DU PONT and GORE.    Secondly, analyze RN carefully and we found out that the activated carbon, PTFE, and Polyethylene were the main CPC material. After 2000, the activated carbon was integrated with the nanotechnology to promote the adsorption ability as absorption material. On the other hand, the PTFE material was used in membrane to upgrade the air permeability with good resistance to multi-harmful damages. The study also generated the new applications of RN in CPC material, including the absorbent, barrier layer, room-temp.-curable barrier layer for airplane, polymers, crosslinking agent, dispersant, flame-retardant agent, adhesives, enhanced durability agent of protective clothing, reactant of spherical activated carbon, and the polyoxometalate materials for removing environmental contaminant.    Thirdly, analytic results showed that key CPC materials concentrated on the barrier ability, adsorption, detoxifying ability, comfortability, durability, and layer construction. At the same time, the material also integrated into nanotechnology to promote the CPC performances. In the near future, The CPC would be lighter, stronger, and better protected. From passive adsorbent to active detoxifying and combine multi-resistance ability in one piece by applying layer construction to reach the multi-protection purposes, such as protection of atomic, biological and chemical warfare agents.
