協同型顧客關係管理平台架構之研究
A Model of Collaborative Customer Relationship Management Platform
協同商務、顧客關係管理、遺傳規劃法、Web Services
在這個商業環境快速變動的時代，企業間存在著既競爭又合作的關係。由於商業競爭上的壓力，再加上企業所能掌握的資源有限，不得不專注在核心競爭力的發展上。然而，以顧客需求的角度而言，顧客需要的是全方位的服務。為了在核心競爭力與提供顧客全方位服務之間取得平衡點，企業間開始發展出各式各樣的協同合作關係。本研究以顧客關係管理為主題，發展出跨企業組織、有價分享顧客關係管理資源的協同型顧客關係管理模式，並且以Web Services為技術架構實作出一個資訊化的協同型顧客關係管理平台雛型系統，用以驗證協同型顧客關係管理模式在運作上及技術上的可行性。    由於企業的顧客關係管理活動都是顧客導向的，因此企業利用顧客輪廓規則來識別其目標顧客。在跨企業組織的協同型顧客關係管理模式下，企業更是需要給予企業夥伴一個明確、精準的目標顧客輪廓規則，以利於協同型顧客關係管理模式的運作。顧客輪廓規則的分析是件十分複雜的工作，本研究利用遺傳規劃法強大的平行搜尋能力，分析目標顧客輪廓規則。    本研究利用協同型顧客關係管理平台雛型系統實際進行三項實驗，以進行遺傳規劃法分析顧客輪廓規則的可靠度測試、協同型顧客關係管理平台技術上的可行性、協同型顧客關係管理模式對企業顧客關係管理績效的影響。實驗結果證明遺傳劃法可以分析出明確、精準、具代表性的目標顧客輪廓規則，以Web Service為基礎的協同型顧客關係管理平台在技術上可行，企業參與協同型顧客關係管理模式對其顧客關係管理績效可以產生正面的影響。
At this age that the environment of commerce is quickly fluctuant, the relation among enterprises is competitive but also cooperative. Because of the pressure on the commercial competition, and the resource that enterprise can hold is limited, the enterprise has to devote to its core competencies. However, from the customer’s point of view, what customer need is an all-direction service. For the sake of balance that is between the core competencies of enterprise and providing customer an all-direction service, the enterprise starts developing various kinds of collaborative relations with others. This study regards Customer Relation Management (CRM) as the subject, and develops a collaborative CRM model that is across the business organizations and shares CRM resource with proper value. Then this study uses Web Services as the information technology architecture to implement a collaborative CRM platform prototype system that identifies the technological and operational feasibility of the collaborative CRM model.    Because CRM activities of enterprises are all customer oriented, so enterprises identify their target customers by customer profile rules. In the collaborative CRM model across business organizations, enterprises have to give its business partners explicit and precise target customers profile rules for the operational convenience of the collaborative CRM model. To analyze profile rules of the target customer is a very complicated work, this research take advantage of the strong parallel search capability of Genetic Programming (GP) to prospect the profile rules of the target customers.    This research conducts three experiments to test the reliability on analyzing customer profile rules with GP, study the technical availability for the collaborative CRM platform, and study the impact of enterprises’ adopting the collaborative CRM model on the CRM performance. The experiment results verify the following arguments  GP can produce definitely precise and representative target customers profile rules; the collaborative CRM platform can use Web Service as the information technology architecture base; enterprises’ adopting collaborative CRM model can generate positive impact on their CRM performances.
