原住民阿美族婚姻感受與共親職之探討--以台北縣市為例
The Research Study of Martial Relationship and Coparenting of Urban Amis Indigenous People Taipei
原住民、阿美族、婚姻感受、共親職、母系特質
本研究的目的主要在於了解阿美族經過社會變遷移居都會區後之婚姻感受及共親職之現況及兩者之關係，並以台北縣市阿美族為對象，進行實證研究。研究方法採用問卷調查法，本研究以「婚姻感受調查表」（marital relationship questionnaire）及「共親職調查表」（coparenting questionnaire）為工具進行研究，共抽取樣本255位，有效樣本161位。採用次數分配、平均數、Cronbach .alpha、相關係數分析、卡方考驗、單因子變異數分析、事後分析、多元逐步迴歸分析等方式統計資料，驗証本研究之假設。本研究所獲致結果如下：一、性別並未造成阿美族婚姻感受及共親職之差異。二、子女年齡、子女數、教育程度及職業隊婚姻感受有顯著差異。三、教育程度與婚姻狀態對婚姻感受及共親職之影響最大。教育程度與婚姻感受及共親職達顯著正相關。婚姻狀態與婚姻感受及共親職呈顯著負相關。四、本研究之阿美族婚姻感受並沒有驗證婚姻U型理論，家有7-12歲學齡子女者，其婚姻感受及共親職程度高於其他組別，家有19歲以上子女者，其婚姻感受程度較低。五、在共親職方面，子女年齡、教育程度及職業等項達顯著差異。家中有7-12歲子女之家庭其共親職合作最高，三角關係及衝突程度最低。六、都會區阿美族仍然保有母系特質的內涵，及影響著阿美族之婚姻互動與感受。阿美族在家庭制度已經轉變為父系，但心理上仍保有母系文化特質。阿美族家庭之權力已經由妻子為主轉變為以丈夫為主。阿美族女性地位優於父權制度下之女性地位，是一個十分尊重女性的社會。七、婚姻感受與共親職合作呈顯著正相關，與共親職三角關係及衝突呈顯著負相關。婚姻感受可以有效預測共親職。八、根據上述研究結果，本研究提出數點建議，謹供政府機關、民間團體及山地服務隊參考。
This paper researched the current situation of and the relationship between the Amis’ marital relationship and co-parenting after they migrated to the urban areas due to social vicissitude. The research targeted the Amis in Taipei County and used the “Marital Relationship Questionnaire” and “Coparenting Questionnaire” in collecting statistical data with total sample 255 and effective sample 161. It used the sampling distribution of the mean, Cronbach alpha, T-test ,the correlation coefficient analysis, Chi-square test, Oneway ANOVA, Post-hoc comparison and multiple regression analysis in confirming the research hypothesis.The results of this research are as follows1.Urban-dwelling Amis still hold their matriarchal characteristic, which continues to influence their marital relationship. Although the Amis have already become paternal in their family system, they still hold the matriarchal traits in their hearts. The primary authority in the Amis family is already transferred from wife to husband. The status of the Amis females surpasses that of the females in a patriarchy, showing that it is a society that highly respects the females.2.The education level and marital condition have the greatest influence on the marital relationship and co-parenting. Education level is significantly positively correlated to marital relationship and co-parenting, whereas the marital condition is significantly negatively correlated.3.This research on Amis marital relationship does not conform to marriage U-theory. The level of marital relationship and co-parenting in the family with 7-12 years old school-age children is higher than in other groups; and in the families with above 19 years old children, the level of marital relationship is lower.4.The degree of intimacy, flexibility and the satisfaction in sex role is higher among the participants who are assisted in their education by their parents-in-law or parents.5.The cooperation between marital relationship and co-parenting is significantly positively correlated, while the triangulation and conflict is significantly negatively correlated. Marital relationship can effectively predict co-parenting.6.On the basis of the above findings, this research proposed several suggestions as a reference to the government agencies, folk associations and mountainous service teams.
