反向投資策略的績效與成因---加入外資買賣超訊息之考量
The Performance and Cause of Contrarian Strategy With the Information of Foreign Investments' Overbuy and Oversell
反向策略、過度反應、外資買賣超、反向策略成因
自從De Bondt & Thaler (1985)發現股票價格存在負的自我相關現象之後，他們認為透過這種股票的價格反轉效果，將使過去表現較差的輸家在未來價格反轉時有較佳的股票報酬；反之過去表現較好的贏家將在價格反轉下而有較差的股票報酬。所以，可以藉由買入輸家並同時賣出贏家的反向策略(contrarian strategy)來獲取超額報酬。本研究針對反向策略的績效與成因做進一步探討，我們採用Chou & Chung(1999)對於反向策略的模型，並進一步加入外資買賣超訊息來形成更具資訊內涵的投資組合，將原有投資組合分類為外資買超、外資賣超、以及外資零持有(無買賣超)的投資組合。    研究發現，短期下無論何種投資組合，反向策略成功的因素皆來自領先落後關係的助益效果，長期下則是來自過度反應的效果而使反向策略成功。此外，我們也發現長期下，針對外資零持有的投資組合使用反向策略，可以得到優於未分類投資組合的反向策略績效。若將市場分為多頭及空頭市場，亦發現在空頭市場下使用反向策略可以得到較佳的報酬。    若我們將反向策略報酬拆解為買入輸家及賣出贏家報酬，我們發現當贏家與輸家報酬產生衝突且反向策略仍然成功時，多存在贏家侵蝕反向策略報酬，而輸家對反向策略產生助益的情形。最後，若結合反向策略成因以及贏家輸家衝突的情況下，我們發現當反向策略的成功是因為過度反應對反向策略的助益大於領先落後關係對反向策略侵蝕時，大多存在贏家對反向策略存在侵蝕效果，但輸家反而對反向策略造成助益的情形，但這樣的情況必須在贏家未反轉而輸家反轉的前提下才能成立。
Since De Bondt & Thaler (1985) found negative autocorrelation of stock price, past loser(winner) may be considered as getting good (poor) performance when stock price reverses. Thus, we can get abnormal return by buying past loser and selling past winner at the same time. We call this investment strategy as “Contrarian Strategy”. This study further focuses on the performance and cause of the contrarian strategy, and we adopt Chou & Chung (1999) model to explain which factor makes the contrarian strategy succeed. We use the information of foreign investments’ overbuy and oversell to construct a more efficient portfolio, then we divide our portfolio into foreign investments’ overbuy portfolio、 foreign investments’ oversell portfolio 、and zero holding portfolio(no overbuy and oversell of foreign investments).  Our study finds that, in short time no matter what kinds of portfolio, the successful factor of the contrarian strategy is the lead-lag factor; however, the effect of overreaction can make the contrarian strategy successful in long time. Besides, if we use the contrarian strategy on zero holding portfolio in long time, we can get better performance than non-dividing portfolio. And when we divide the market into bull market and bear market , we also find return in bear market outperforms that in bull market.  When we divide return of the contrarian strategy into return of long loser side and return of short winner side, we find if winner and loser conflict and the contrarian strategy still succeeds, it exists that winner corrodes return of contrarian strategy and loser besteads return of contrarian strategy. At last, combining the cause of the contrarian strategy and conflict of winner and loser, we find the success of the contrarian strategy results from that the benefit of overreaction outperforms the corrosion of lead-lag factor. It implies that winner corrodes return of the contrarian strategy and loser benefits the contrarian strategy if we ignores the condition that winner doesn’t reverse but loser reverses.
