叢集網頁伺服器中低阻斷率之串聯與並聯等效佇列分析與量測的探討
Analysis and Measurement of the Equivalent Model of Serial and Parallel Queues for a Web Cluster with a Low Rejection Rate
等效佇列、排隊網路、網頁叢集伺服器
由於網頁服務(Web Service)的發展越來越多元，再加上網際網路(Internet)的日漸普及，網頁伺服器(Web Server)的負擔也就日益增加。為了滿足網頁使用者要求，透過叢集網頁伺服器(Web Cluster)的方式分散單一伺服器的負擔是近年來常用的方法。由於網站的伺服器常常是階段性地增加，而且為了應付各種狀況也會機動性地調動。我們透過使用者存取網頁的系統響應時間(System Response Time)以排隊理論(Queuing Theory)中M M 1的模型來進行推導與研究，推導出叢集網頁伺服器中低阻斷率之串聯與並聯等效佇列的方程式，以及求出其一般通用式。為了增加這個方程式的實用性，我們提出抽取系統服務率的一個方法。此法利用最小方均根誤差(Minimum Mean Square Error)的計算來找出系統的實際服務率(Service Rate)。藉由這些方程式以及抽取服務率的方法，可以幫忙調整系統負載平衡，提供網頁存取快速的回應效能。最後我們利用QNAT模擬軟體與Webserver Stress Tool 6.15量測軟體設計了一連串的分析、模擬與實驗量測，這些結果驗證理論推導的方程式其正確性與等效方程式計算所得到的系統響應時間與實際系統相當接近。
Due to the diverse development of the Web Services and Internet applications, the Web service requests of Web servers have increased substantially. In recent years, in order to fulfill the service requests and maintain the quality of Web services, one can use Web clusters to share the large amount of service requests. However, for a practical operation, multiple groups of Web servers may coexist in a Web cluster, due to different types of products. Thus, in this paper, we propose a serial and parallel equivalent equation and general form with a low rejection rate based on a typical M M 1 queuing model to analyze the service performance of a Web cluster. In order to increase the practicability of the equivalent equations, we also propose a method for obtaining the system service. This method computes the system service rate by using the Minimum Mean Square Error. It is useful to adjust the parameters for load balance not only by the equivalent equation but also by the method for exacting the system service. Overall, by using the QNAT simulation and the Webserver Stress Tool measurement, we provide a general quantitative relationship between the numbers of servers of these groups for a cluster in order to expand the service capacity. These results also show the two-pass method can provide both a load balance and a more reliable system for fulfilling Web requests.
