台北縣新莊地區國中生運動行為及其影響因素之研究
Study on Exercise Behaviors and Other Influential Factors for Junior High School Students in Sinjhuang Area of Taipei County
運動行為、運動自我效能、運動結果期待、運動社會支持
本研究目的主要在了解國中生課後運動參與之現況，並探討運動行為與其背景變項、運動自我效能、運動結果期待及運動社會支持之關係。本研究採用問卷調查法以叢集抽樣方式，對台北縣新莊地區12所國中學生共1213人做調查。所得資料以項目分析、因素分析、描述性統計、獨立樣本t考驗、單因子變異數分析、薛費法事後比較、皮爾森積差相關及多元迴歸等統計方法處理，經分析與討論後的結果如下：一、有規律運動的國中生佔35.59%。二、男性國中生「運動行為」優於女性國中生；七、八年級國中生「運    動行為」優於九年級國中生；沒有補習的國中生「運動行為」優於有補習的國中生；有參與運動社團的國中生在「運動行為」優於沒有參與運動社團的國中生；家長的教育程度與國中生的「運動行為」無顯著差異。三、男性國中生「運動自我效能」高於女性國中生；七、八年級國中    生在「運動自我效能」高於九年級國中生；有參與運動社團的國中生在「運動自我效能」高於沒有參與運動社團的國中生；是否補習、家長的教育程度與國中生在「運動自我效能」無顯著差異。四、男性國中生在「運動結果期待」高於女性國中生；八年級國中生    在「運動結果期待」高於七年級國中生；有參與運動社團的國中生在「運動結果期待」高於沒有參與運動社團的國中生；是否補習、家長的教育程度與國中生「運動結果期待」無顯著差異。五、男性國中生在「運動社會支持」高於女性國中生；七、八年級國中生在「運動社會支持」高於九年級國中生；有參與運動社團的國中生在「運動社會支持」高於沒有參與運動社團的國中生；是否補習、家長的教育程度與國中生「運動社會支持」無顯著差異。六、運動自我效能、運動結果期待及運動社會支持變項與運動行為呈    正相關且對運動行為的聯合預測力達44.6%。    根據研究結果可以發現，「運動自我效能」是學生運動行為的最重要預測變項，研究中亦發現運動自我效能會受到性別、年級及參與運動團隊經驗等背景因素的影響，有關單位可從增加「運動自我效能」方面著手，進而提高運動行為。
The study mainly aimed to examine the status of after-class exercise participation for the junior-high-school students and to study the relationship among exercise behaviors, its background variables, exercise self-efficacy, exercise outcome expectation, and exercise social support. This research adopted cluster sampling to survey the 12 junior high schools in Sinjhuang Area, Taipei County, totally 1213 students.  The gathering data were analyzed by item analysis, factor analysis , descriptive statistic, independent samples t-text, One-way ANOVA, Scheffe’s posterior comparison, Pearson product-moment correlation and multiple regression. The findings and results were as followsA.  35.59% junior high school students kept regular exercise.B.  As for the exercise behavior, the male junior high school students were better than the female. The 7th and the 8th grade students were better than the 9th grade students. Besides, those who did not join the cram school were better than those who joined. Those who joined the sports clubs or groups were better than those who did not join and there was no significant difference between the education level of students’ parents and students’ exercise behavior.C.  As for the exercise self-efficacy, the male junior high school students were better than the female. The 7th and the 8th grade students were better than the 9th grade students. Besides, those who did not join the cram school were better than those who joined. Those who joined the sports clubs or groups were better than those who did not join and there was no significant difference between the education level of students’ parents and students’ exercise self-efficacy.D.  As for the exercise outcome expectation, the male junior high school students were better than the female. The 8th grade students were better than the 7th grade students. Besides, those who did not join the cram school were better than those who joined. Those who joined the sports clubs or groups were better than those who did not join and there was no significant difference between the education level of students’ parents and students’ exercise outcome expectation.E.  As for the exercise social support, the male junior high school students were better than the female. The 7th and the 8th grade students were better than the 9th grade students. Besides, those who did not join the cram school were better than those who joined. Those who joined the sports clubs or groups were better than those who did not join and there was no significant difference between the education level of students’ parents and students’ exercise social support.F.  The variables of exercise self-efficacy, exercise outcome expectation, exercise social supports were positive correlated. The variables of exercise self-efficacy, exercise outcome expectation, exercise social supports could be used to predict the exercise behavior. effectively with 44.6﹪of total varianceAccording to the above research results, we could find “exercise self-efficacy” was the most important predictable variable for the students’ exercise behaviors. In addition, we could find “exercise self-efficacy” was influenced by gender, grades, and the background variables, such as sports club or groups participation in the research as well. Therefore, the study suggested that the school authorities could increase and pay more attention to “exercise self efficacy” to boost the frequency of students’s exercise behaviors.
