台商利用B2C模型進入大陸非實體商品市場之可行性研究
Feasibility Study on Applying B2C to Metropolitan City in East China for Taiwanese Financial Industry to Non-physical Product
可行性研究、非實體商品、保險商品、大陸市場

隨著電腦硬體價格下降及網路環境的改善，網際網路的應用日漸普及，上網人口也逐年增加，使得電子商務的交易活動日益蓬勃。企業也利用電子商務的B2C模式，為企業開拓一條新的銷售管道。網上下單購物之標的，可分為實體商品與非實體商品，這兩種商品因為配送和倉儲的問題，在電子交易中有不同的考量。本研究乃以保險商品為例，從行銷觀點切入而整理出交易完成需考量之要素，以這些要素來探討台商欲進入大陸非實體市場之可行性。本研究經由行銷管理學、保險商品線上交易之特性及專家訪談，歸納出以B2C模式進入大陸保險市場需檢驗之可行性因素共十五項。根據這些因素設計問卷，利用次數分配分析、T檢定、單因子變異數分析等統計分析方法進行問卷資料的分析，同時也對目前大陸之網路購物環境之滿意度進行問卷調查分析。由分析中可知，大陸受訪者普遍認為保險公司信譽及規模很重要，也能接受台灣的保險公司，對於電子憑證、電子保單及網上下單買保險，大部分的人均能接受，而網路交易安全性也是大家相當在意的要素，甚至影響網上下單購物的意願。雖然經由網路販賣商品可為企業節省部份成本及費用，但是進行廣告活動，讓消費者願意到網站瀏覽購物仍是必須的。經由問卷調查結果，受訪者對目前網路購物環境大體上是滿意的，但是在消費者保障及網路安全性方面則不甚滿意，這是將來欲進入大陸網路購物市場者需要注意與加強的部份。
Along with the drop in price of computer hardware and the improvement of network environment, the Internet application popularizes day after day. The population of accessing the Internet also increases year by year. These situations cause the transactions of the electronic commerce to be vigorous day by day. The enterprise also uses the B2C pattern to develop a new sale channel. The product of Internet shopping can be divided into physical product and non- physical product. Because of the problems of delivery and storage, there are different considerations in the electronic transaction to these two kinds of product. This research takes insurance as an example and works out the essential factors when we want a transaction to complete from the marketing viewpoint and uses these factors to discuss the feasibility for the Taiwanese businessman who wants to enter the non- physical market in mainland China.This research is by way of the marketing management, on-line transaction characteristics of insurance and the interview to expert, and then induces the 15 feasible factors that should be examined to enter the insurance market in mainland by the B2C pattern. According to these factors, the research uses the number of times assignment analysis, the T examination, and ANOVA to analyze the results of questionnaire, and simultaneously carries on the survey analysis to the degree of satisfaction of network shopping environment in present mainland China.We can know from the analysis that most of the participant think the prestige and the scale of the insurance company are very important, they can also accept the insurance company from Taiwan. Majority of average per person can accept the electronic certificate, the electronic policy and buying insurance by Internet. The network transaction security is an essential factor everybody quite cares about, even it will affect the volition of people to buy commodity by Internet. Although trading by the network can save partial cost and expense for the enterprise, carrying on advertisement campaign to let the consumer to browse and shop in the website is still to be must. By way of the result of questionnaire survey, the participant is satisfied with the present shopping environment in the network roughly. Consumers are not really satisfied with the consumer safeguard and the network security, and those who want to enter the network shopping market in mainland China should strengthen and care the two factors.
