台北縣國民小學教師專業角色知覺與教師效能關係之研究
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PERCEPTION OF TEACHERS' PROFESSIONAL ROLES AND TEACHERS’EFFECTIVENESS AT PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI COUNTY
教師專業角色、教師效能、國民小學教師
摘    要本研究旨在瞭解台北縣國民小學教師專業角色知覺與教師效能間的關係，透過問卷調查的方式以「台北縣國民小教師專業角色知覺與教師效能調查問卷」進行研究，研究對象係以台北縣公立國民小學教師為調查對象，共計發出問卷930份，回收問卷695份，有效回收率為75.05%。資料統計分析利用描述統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析（ANOVA）、積差相關及多元逐步回歸等統計方法加以分析。根據研究結果，歸納出以下結論：一、台北縣教師專業角色知覺與教師效能的現況均呈現優良程度。二、在教師專業角色知覺上，女性教師的教師專業角色知覺在整體上優於男性教師；41-45歲教師的知覺程度優於35歲以下教師；教學年資在16-20年教師的教師專業角色知覺程度優於5年以下教師；整體教師專業角色知覺為24~59班學校優於60~99班和100班以上學校。三、在教師效能上， 36歲以上教師優於其他30歲以下之教師；在該校服務年資6年以上教師優於5年以下之教師。而教學總年資在16年以上教師的教師效能優於5年以下教師。四、教師專業角色知覺與教師效能呈顯著正相關；教師專業角色知覺的各構面對教師效能的不同構面具預測力。
ABSTRACT  The purpose of this study was to explore the relationship between the perception of teachers’ professional roles and teachers’ effectiveness at public elementary schools in Taipei County.  The research instrument was the questionnaire about the perception of teachers’ professional roles and teachers’ effectiveness.  There were 930 copies of questionnaires distributed and with 695 copies received.  The return rate was 75.05%.  The data were analyzed by the following statistical methods, including descriptive statistics, t-test, ANOVA, Pearson’s product-movement correlation, and multiple regressions.According to results of the study, several conclusions were found.  First of all, the perception of teachers’ professional roles and teachers’ effectiveness at public elementary schools in Taipei County were good.  As to the perception of teachers’ professional roles, female teachers were better than males’; the age group of 41 to 45 years old was better than the age group below 30; those who teaching for 16 to 20 years performed better than those below 5 years; teachers in schools with the classes of 24 to 59 had better perception of teachers’ professional roles than those in schools with the classes over 60. With respect to the teachers’ effectiveness, those aged above 36 performed better than those aged below 30; those who taught more than 6 years in a specific school were better than those who taught less than 5 years in that school; those teaching for 16-20 years were better than those below 5 years.  At the end, the relationship between the perception of teachers’ professional roles and teachers’ effectiveness was significantly positive correlated with the teachers’ effectiveness, and the perception of teachers’ professional roles could effectively predict the teachers’ effectiveness.
