台北市國民小學家長心目中理想校長條件之研究
A STUDY OF QUALIFICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL PRINCIPALS FROM PARENTS, PERSPECTIVES IN TAIPEI CITY
國民小學、家長、校長條件
本研究之目的是希望透過問卷調查的方式，了解台北市國民小學家長心目中理想校長的條件。為達此目的，以文獻探討結果為基礎，編製「台北市國民小學家長心目中理想校長條件之調查問卷」作為調查工具，並以分層隨機抽樣抽取台北市36所市立小學的家長為施測對象，共發出問卷1069份，有效問卷928份，有效回收率86.8﹪。資料分析採用描述統計及卡方考驗等統計方法。    研究發現，多數不同背景家長對理想校長的條件未如預期有顯著差異，但卻有共同的理想校長條件。以校長背景條件而言，家長認為性別不是必要的條件；學歷以不是必要的條件居首，碩士學歷其次；至於校長的年齡，家長認為41-50歲最理想。在校長的條件向度方面，家長最在意校長的能力，其次是校長的行為表徵，再次是校長的人格特質。而在校長的能力向度方面，家長最在意的校長條件指標有善於危機處理、卓越行政領導、營造公共關係；在校長的行為表徵方面，有能反省知回應、型塑共同願景、積極協調溝通；在校長的人格特質方面，則家長希望校長能勇於負責任事。關鍵字：國民小學、家長、校長條件
The purpose of the study was to investigate the qualifications of elementary school principals from parents’ perspectives in Taipei City through the method of questionnaire survey.  Based on the result of literature review, a self-designed survey edited “the questionnaire of the qualifications of elementary school principals from parents’ perspectives in Taipei city” was used as the research tool to collect and analyze the data. The subjects studied, selected by stratified random sampling, were the parents from 36 public elementary schools in Taipei City.  The total number of questionnaires issued was 1069 and the returned number of valid questionnaires was 928 at response rate of 86.8%.  Statistics methods including descriptive statistics and chi-square tests were used to analyze the data.  The results indicated that no significant differences were found among the most parents from the different backgrounds, but they had very similar expectations on the principals’ qualifications.  Regarding the background of a principal, most of the parents thought the gender and educational degree were not the necessary qualifications of principals, but master degree was considered as an important qualification by the second highest number of parents.  Most of the parents responded, 41 to 50 years old would be the best range of a principal’s age.  In the dimensions of a principal’s qualifications, parents cared about the principal’s abilities most, and then the characterization of a principal’s behavior, a principal’s personality traits came the third.  Regarding the abilities, the parents cared most about the principals’ abilities of dealing with crisis, providing excellent administrative leadership and developing public relationships.  With respect to the behaviors, the parents expected the principals were good at self-reflecting, responding, creating shared vision, and constructing positive communication.  In the personality traits, parents expected a principal would be able to hold accountable and act earnestly.Key words elementary school, parents, principals’ qualifications
