台北市高職學生升學壓力、因應方式與身心健康之研究
THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG RNTRANCE EXAMINATION, COPING RESPONSES, AND MENTAL HEALTH OF THE STUDENTS AT VACATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN TAIPEI
升學壓力、因應方式、身心健康

本研究旨在探討台北市高職學生升學壓力、因應方式與身心健康三者之間的關係，以台北市公私立高職的三年級學生為研究對象，共計531名。本研究採問卷調查法進行資料收集，所使用的研究工具包括「升學壓力量表」﹑「升學壓力因應行為量表」﹑「一般健康量表」。調查所得資料分別以t檢定、多元迴歸分析等統計方法進行資料處理。本研究主要發現如下：1、主要的升學壓力源為考試壓力、自我期望與課業壓力，而教師與父母壓力最少。2、最常使用的因應行為是「逃避」、「情緒紓解」，最少使用與「情緒困擾」。3、47.6.%呈現身心不健康。4、不同性別在「父母壓力」、「考試壓力」上，呈現顯著差異。5、不同性別在「積極因應」、「面對壓力」上，呈現顯著差異。6、「自我期望」、「父母壓力」、「考試壓力」、「教師壓力」四個變項對「積極因應方式」有顯著影響。其解釋力達34.2%。7、「自我期望」、「父母壓力」、「課業壓力」、「考試壓力」四個變項對「消極因應方式」有顯著影響。其解釋力達27.5%。8、可預測「身心健康」之重要變項為：「父母壓力」、「課業壓力」、「面對壓力」以及「情緒困擾」等變項。最後根據本研究結果進行綜合討論，提出建議以供相關單位參考。並對未來研究方向提出建議。
AbstractThe purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship amongentrance examination, coping responses, and mental health of students at vocational high school in Taipei. The study is based on a total of 531 teenage students from 15 senior vocational high schools in Taipei. The materials used in this study are Entrance Examination Stress Questionnaire, Coping Responses Questionnaire, and Chinese Health Questionnaire.The t-test, correlation analysis are used to analyze the data and the results are shown as below1.  The students’ main entrance examination stress comes from examination itself, self expectation, and stress from studies, while stress from teachers and parents is little.2.  The coping behaviors most students use are “shirking” and “emotion relieving”, only a few students have “emotional disturbance.”3.  61.6% students have mental health problem.4.  There’s obvious difference between boys and girls when it comes to “stress from parents” and “stress from examination.”5.  There’s obvious difference between male students and female students in “positive coping responses” and “facing the pressure.”6.  “Stress from examination”, “self expectation”, “stress from teachers” and “stress from parents” have significant influence on “positive coping responses”. These variables explain 34.2% of the effects.7.  “Stress from examination”, “self expectation”, “stress from studies”, and “stress from parents” have significant influence on “negative coping responses”. These variables explain 27.5% of the effects8.  It is predictable that the important variables of mental health are “stress from parents”, “stress from studies”, “facing problems” “emotional disturbance”, etc..The above results have been discussed in the thesis and some suggestions for further study are made as well.
