台北市公立國民中學學校願景發展與教師工作士氣之關係研究
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE VISION DEVELOPMENT OF SCHOOL AND THE WORKING MORALE OF TEACHERS AT THE PUBLIC JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI CITY
學校願景、願景發展、工作士氣

本研究旨在探討國民中學學校願景發展與教師工作士氣的關係，採問卷調查法進行研究。根據相關文獻分析，自編「台北市國民中學學校願景發展與教師工作士氣調查問卷」，以台北市立國民中學教師為調查之母群體，採分層隨機抽樣抽取研究樣本，受試者為任職於台北市29所公立國民中學805位專任教師。問卷回收616份，有效問卷499份，有效率62﹪。回收資料以SPSS統計套裝軟體，進行次數分配、描述統計、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、皮爾森積差相關與多元逐步迴歸統計方法分析。根據研究結果分析與討論，本研究獲得以下結論：一、目前台北市國民中學學校願景發展現況尚可，以「願景形成階段」分數最高；「願景實踐階段」次之，「願景檢視階段」的分數較低。二、目前台北市國民中學教師工作士氣現況良好，以「工作投入」分數最高，「組織認同」次之，「團體凝聚力」的分數最低。三、不同學校規模、性別、職務之教師在學校願景發展知覺上有顯著差異，「30班以下」與「46-60班」、男性教師、專任教師兼行政之教師知覺較高。不同校齡、校長服務年資、學歷、服務年資之教師在學校願景發展知覺上沒有顯著差異。四、不同學校規模、職務、服務年資之教師在教師工作士氣知覺上有顯著差異，「30班以下」與「46-60班」、專任教師兼行政、服務年資「16年以上」之教師知覺較高。不同校齡、校長服務年資、性別、學歷之教師在學校願景發展知覺上沒有顯著差異。五、學校願景發展與教師工作士氣兩個變項呈正相關；學校願景發展各階段與教師工作士氣各構面相關皆達顯著。六、學校願景發展對教師工作士氣有預測力；學校願景發展各階段對教師工作士氣各構面皆有預測力。關鍵字：學校願景、願景發展、教師工作士氣
The purpose of the study examined the relationship between the vision development of the school and the working morale of teachers at Junior High Schools in Taipei City. A questionnaire Survey was adopted in the paper. The stratified random samples included 499 teachers from 29 public junior high schools in Taipei City. The response rate of useful questionnaires was 62%. Furthermore, the collected data were analyzed by some statistic methods, including frequency, mean, standard deviation, t-test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson’s product-moment correlation, and stepwise multiple regression. Based on the analysis and discussion of the results, there were some conclusions belowI.The performance of the vision development at the junior high schools in Taipei was a little better than the average. The performance of the “shaping vision stage” was the best, the “implementing vision stage” was the second, and the “evaluating vision stage” was the lowest.II.The performance of the teacher morale in the junior high schools in Taipei was much better than the average. The performance of “organizational identification” was the best, “job involvement” was the second, and “group cohesiveness” was the lowest.III.The teachers with different background variables, including size of school, gender, and job titles, had significant differences on the perception of the vision development of school. The teachers with the background variables, including “below 30 classes,” “46-60 classes,” “male teachers,” and “administrative teachers” had higher perception of the vision development of the school. However, the teachers with different background variables, including years of school, years of principal’s service, and academic degree, and years of teaching didn’t have significant differences on the perception of the vision development of school.IV.The teachers with different background variables, including size of school, job titles, and years of teaching had significant differences on the perception of the working morale of teacher. The teachers with the background variables, including “below 30 classes,” “46-60 classes,” “administrative teachers,” and “above 16 teaching years” had higher perception of the working morale of teachers. However, the teachers with different background variables, including years of school, years of principal’s service, gender, and academic degree, didn’t have significant differences on the perception of the working morale of teachers.V.There was a significant positive relationship between the vision development of school and the working morale of teachers.VI.The vision development of school had predictability on the working morale of teachers, and the “implementing vision stage” was the strongest predictor.Keyword school vision, vision development, teacher morale
