台北市公立國民小學教師全球視野認知與影響因素之研究
THE STUDY ON THE AWARENESS OF GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES AND ITS INFLUENCING FACTORS AMONG PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHERS IN TAIPEI
全球視野、全球化、國民小學教師

本研究之目的在了解當前臺北市公立國民小學教師全球視野認知與其影響因素，經由文獻探討，將全球視野認知分為「個人的國際態度」及「國際事物的體認」兩方面。透過問卷調查的方式，臺北市141所公立國民小學正式教師為研究對象，共發出問卷820份，回收643份，其中有效問卷計606份，回收率為78.4%。資料分析採用描述統計、t檢定、單因子變異數分析、皮爾遜積差相關及多元迴歸分析等統計方法。研究發現臺北市公立國民小學教師全球視野認知現況屬於中上程度，在個人的國際態度方面表現較國際事物的體認佳。背景因素中，男性教師全球視野認知程度優於女性教師；年齡及服務年資較高者，其全球視野認知表現較差；英語教師全球視野認知程度較兼任行政教師佳；一般大學碩士學歷者在全球視野認知程度表現優於師範院校學士學歷者；而國際事務相關經驗越豐富，其全球視野認知表現越好；常常辦理國際交流活動的學校，該校的教師全球視野認知表現亦優於不曾辦理的學校。背景變項雖與全球視野認知程度間具有預測力，但預測力較低，僅能呈現國際事物相關經驗與全球視野認知程度較具預測能力。
The study investigated the awareness degree of global perspectives among public elementary teachers in Taipei and factors influencing it. The term ‘global perspectives’ incorporated two dimensions in the study ‘personal attitude towards the international world’ and ‘awareness of international affairs’. A questionnaire was designed for the purpose of this study. It was distributed to 820 formal teachers from 141 public elementary schools in Taipei. Six hundred and forty-three copies were returned and, among which, 606 were valid. The returned rate was 78.4%. The data were analyzed by using descriptive statistics, t-Test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson’s product-moment correlation and multiple regression analysis.The result showed that generally the subjects’ awareness degrees of global perspectives were slightly higher than average level, and that they scored higher in dimension ‘personal attitude towards international world’ than in ‘awareness of international affairs’. Further analysis revealed that male teachers scored higher than females in the awareness degree of global perspectives. Younger teachers and teachers with fewer teaching years also scored higher than older ones and those with more teaching years. It also showed that English teachers scored higher than teachers with duties administrative, and teachers with master’s degrees awarded by general universities scored higher than those with bachelor’s degrees awarded by normal colleges and universities. Furthermore, the more teachers were experienced in handling international affairs, the higher score they had. Teachers from schools that held activities with international schools frequently scored higher than those whose schools had never held similar activities. By applying multiple regression analysis it was found that although the background variables could predict the performance on awareness of global perspectives, they might not make good predictions. Only the variable ‘experience of handling international affairs’ could be seen as a good predictor to the performance on awareness of global perspectives.
