台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員工作價值觀、工作投入與工作倦怠之研究
A Study on Work Values, Work Involvement, and Work Burnout of Child Educational Sports Game Instructors in Taipei
幼兒運動遊戲指導員、工作價值觀、工作投入、工作倦怠
摘    要本研究旨在瞭解台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導人員工作價值觀、工作投入與工作倦怠之情形，並分析不同人口統計變項的幼兒運動遊戲指導人員的工作價值觀、工作投入與工作倦怠之差異情形，以及探討幼兒運動遊戲指導員工作價值觀、工作投入與工作倦怠彼此之間的相關情形。本研究以台北縣市立案之公私立幼稚園中擔任幼兒運動遊戲課程之指導人員為研究對象，以改編的「幼兒運動遊戲指導員工作價值觀、工作投入與工作倦怠之調查問卷」作為資料收集的工具，以普查方式進行問卷調查，共計發出740 份，回收有效問卷496 份回收率為69.59％。依所得資料以描述性統計、因素分析、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析、Seheffe’s 事後檢定及皮爾森積差相關等統計方法進行分析。獲致以下結論：一、目前台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員大部份以女性居多，年齡約為28∼32 歲，大多數都未婚，工作年資屆為一～三年，擁有大學學歷，其中以幼保相關科系畢業的學生居多，每年平均參與1～2次研習會居多，大多數都沒有專業證照，平均月收入大多在40001～50000元。二、台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員在工作價值觀的各層面均屬重要的程度；在工作投入的程度算高；在工作倦怠的感受並不高。三、台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員在工作價值觀認知上，因不同人口統計變項的不同而有所差異；在工作倦怠的感受上，因婚姻狀況的不同而有所差異。四、台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員就整體工作價值觀與整體工作投入呈顯著正相關。五、台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員就整體工作投入與整體工作倦怠呈無顯著相關。六、台北縣市幼兒運動遊戲指導員就整體工作價值觀與整體工作倦怠呈無顯著相關。關鍵詞：幼兒運動遊戲指導員、工作價值觀、工作投入、工作倦怠
AbstractThis study aims to understand the situation of work values, work involvement, and work burnout of child educational sports game instructors in Taipei. In addition, it tried to uncover the difference between demographics and work values, work involvement, and work burnout of child educational sports game instructors in Taipei. The study also attempted to uncover the relationship among work values, work involvement, and work burnout of child educational sports game instructors in Taipei.The objects of this study were child educational sports game instructors in kindergartens in Taipei and this study employed a questionnaire of rearranged by “The work values, work involvement, and work burnout of child educational sports game instructors program” as the instrument of investigation. There were 496 valid questionnaire gathered out of 740 samples. All the data were analyzed with statistics, factor analysis, independent-sample t test, One-Way ANOVA, Scheffe’s method, and Pearson product moment coefficient of correlation. The major findings in this study were described as follows1. The number of female principals in South District was higher than that of male ones at present. Their ages were from 28 to 32 years old, and most of them were unmarried and had 1-to-3-year working experience. The majority of instructors held a college or higher degree, were graduated from Early Childhood Education major or related fields, participated 1 or 2 symposiums every year, had no professional licenses, and their salaries were from 40,001 to 50,000.2.There was importance of child educational sports game instructors on all aspects of work values, high presentation on work involvement, and low presentation on work burnout.3.There were significant differences between work values and demographics, and between work burnout and marriage.4.There was significant positive relationship between work values and work involvement.5.There was no significant positive relationship between work involvement and work burnout.6.There was no significant positive relationship between work burnout and work values.Key words Child educational sports game instructor, Work values, Work involvement, Work burnout
