台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊素養及資訊科技融入教學之研究
A Study on the Information Literacy and Integrating Information Technology of Junior High School Health & P.E. Teachers in Taipei County
健康與體育、資訊素養、資訊科技融入教學
台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊素養及資訊科技融入教學之研究摘要研究生：鄭秀玲                          指導教授：張宏亮 博士本研究旨在探討國中健康與體育學習領域教師資訊素養與資訊科技融入教學之現況。以問卷調查方式收集資料，研究對象為台北縣國中健康與體育學習領域之現任教師，採叢集抽樣方式進行抽樣，共抽取35所學校，計320名健康與體育教師。回收之資料以描述性統計、t考驗、單因子變異數分析等統計方式進行分析。研究結果如下：一、台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊素養就資訊基本素養、應用軟體素養、資源運用素養三個層面而言，尚稱良好。其中以應用軟體素養部分程度最佳，其次為資訊基本素養、資源運用素養。二、台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊科技融入教學現況就資訊科技融入教學的態度、資訊設備利用、網路資源利用及學校行政支援，四個層面而言，為中上程度。其中以資訊科技融入教學的態度部分程度最高，其次為網路資源利用、學校行政支援、資訊設備利用。三、台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊素養會因年齡、最高學歷、服務年資、任教科目、現任職務等背景不同，有顯著差異。四、台北縣國中健康與體育教師資訊科技融入教學現況會因性別、服務年資、任教科目等背景不同，有顯著差異。根據以上研究結果，本研究針對教育行政單位、教師與未來研究提出建議，以作為教育與研究之參考。關鍵詞：健康與體育、資訊素養、資訊科技融入教學
A Study on the Information Literacy and Integrating Information Technology of Junior High School Health & P.E. Teachers in Taipei CountyGraduate student Hsiu-Ling Cheng   Advisor Dr. Hung Liang –ChangAbstract   This study was to investigate the current situation of junior high school Health & P.E. teachers’ information literacy and integrating technology. The data was collected by using questionnaires, and the subjects of the study was the junior high school Health &P.E. teachers who were sampled by using cluster sampling in Taipei county ( including 320 Health & P.E. teachers from 35 schools ). The data were analyzed with standard deviation, t-test, one-way ANOVA. The major findings of this study were as the following1.  The basic information literacy, applying software literacy, implementing resource literacy of junior high school Health & P.E. teachers in Taipei County were pretty good. The part of applying software literacy was the best , then the basic information literacy, and implementing resource literacy was the last.2.  The attitude of integrating information technology, information facilities utilizing, Internet using, and aid of school administration for the current situation of the junior high school Health & P.E. teachers’ integrating information technology in Taipei County were above the average level.The attitude of integration information technology was the highest, while the Internet using was the second highest, then the aid of school administration, and the information facilities utilizing was the last.3.  The junior high school Health & P.E. teachers’ Informational literacy was significant difference in Taipei County because of the background in age, educational background, seniority, teaching subject, and current position.4.  The junior high school Health & P.E. teachers’ Integrating information literacy was significant difference in Taipei County because of the background in gender, seniority, and teaching subject.According to the conclusion above, this study made a suggestion to administrative departments,teachers, as well as future studies.Key words Health and P.E., Informational literacy, Integrating information literacy
