台北縣國民小學教師對親師衝突知覺與衝突管理策略之研究
A STUDY OF TAIPEI COUNTY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHERS’ AWARENESS OF PARENT-TEACHER CONFLICTSAND THEIR CONFLICT MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
國民小學、親師衝突、親師衝突知覺、衝突管理策略
本研究旨在探討國民小學教師知覺親師衝突的現況、來源及其衝突管理策略，並比較不同背景變項所產生的差異，進一步分析親師衝突的來源與衝突管理策略之關係。    本研究採用問卷調查法，以94學年度台北縣國民小學教師為研究對象，採分層隨機抽樣方法，共計發出893份，回收有效問卷754份，調查所得資料以次數分配、百分比、平均數、標準差、獨立樣本 t 檢定、單因子變異數分析、皮爾遜積差相關、典型相關等統計方法，進行資料處理分析，主要結論如下：ㄧ、台北縣有99.3％的國小教師知覺到校園中有發生親師衝突的情形，且感受到    親師衝突發生的頻率屬於中等以上程度。二、台北縣國小教師對於親師衝突來源的整體知覺屬於中等程度，其中以「溝通    協調不良或障礙」的知覺最高。三、台北縣國小教師對於親師衝突管理策略的整體知覺屬於中等程度，其中以「績    效合作策略」及「互動協商策略」的知覺最高。四、台北縣國小教師知覺親師衝突發生頻率之現況，因性別、學校規模、班級人    數的不同而有顯著差異。五、台北縣國小教師知覺親師衝突來源，在各來源構面上，因性別、學校規模的    不同而有顯著差異。六、台北縣國小教師知覺親師衝突管理策略，在各策略構面及「整體策略」上，    因教育程度、學校規模的不同而有顯著差異。七、國小教師知覺親師衝突來源與其衝突管理策略間具有顯著的低度正相關。八、親師衝突來源之五個構面與衝突管理策略之五個構面間具有典型相關，並可    抽出兩組典型因素。九、就典型相關而言，當親師衝突來源是「對教師專業與言行的不信任」時，就    越會採取「隔離不理策略」；當親師衝突來源是「溝通協調不良或障礙」與「教    育理念與認知的不同」時，就越會採取「績效合作策略」及「互動協商策略」。    最後根據研究發現，並綜合相關文獻與研究心得，分別對國民小學教師、學校領導者、教育行政機關、師資培育機構及後續研究者提出建議，以供實務工作與學術研究之參考。關鍵詞：國民小學、親師衝突、親師衝突知覺、衝突管理策略
The purpose of this study is to explore elementary school teachers’ awareness of the current condition and source of parent-teacher conflicts, as well as their conflict management strategies. It compares differences cased by different background variables and delves into the relationship between the source of parent-teacher conflicts and their conflict management strategies.    This research employs the survey questionnaire method and studies elementary school teachers of Taipei County in the academic year of 2005. Based on the stratified random sampling method, 893 questionnaires were issued and 754 valid returns were received. Data obtained from the survey were processed and analyzed via statistical approaches such as number distribution, percentage, average, independent sample t-test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson product-moment correlation and canonical correlation. Major conclusions are as follows1.  As much as 99.3% of all elementary school teachers in Taipei County perceive parent-teacher conflicts in school, and the frequency of such incidents is over the medium level.2.  Taipei County elementary school teachers’ overall awareness of the source of parent-teacher conflicts is in the medium level. Awareness of “poor communication or coordination barriers” is the highest.3.  Taipei County elementary school teachers’ overall awareness of conflict management strategies is in the medium level. Awareness of “effective cooperation strategy” and “interactive coordination strategy” is the highest.4.  Taipei County elementary school teachers’ awareness of the frequency of parent-teacher conflicts differs significantly due to differences in gender, school size and class size.5.  In terms of the “source” dimension, Taipei County elementary school teachers’ awareness of the source of parent-teacher conflicts differs significantly due to differences in gender and school size.6.  In terms of the various strategic dimensions and the “overall strategy,” Taipei County elementary school teachers’ awareness of conflict management strategies differs significantly due to differences in degree of education and school size.7.  There is a significant, low-degree positive correlation between elementary school teachers’ awareness of the source of parent-teacher conflicts and their conflict management strategies.8.  There is a canonical correlation between the 5 dimensions of the source of parent-teacher conflicts and the 5 dimensions of conflict management strategies. And 2 sets of canonical factors can be extracted.9.  In terms of canonical correlation, the more the parent-teacher conflict is about “distrust in the teacher’s professional ability and conduct,” the more teachers will turn to the “separation and ignoring strategy.” When the sources of parent-teacher conflicts are “poor or hindered communication” and “educational concept and understanding discrepancy” teachers are more inclined to employ the “performance cooperation strategy” and the “interactive negotiation strategy.”Finally, in accordance with research findings and literature analysis, recommendations are proposed for elementary school teachers, school leaders, education administration agencies, teachers’ training institutions and follow-up studies as references for field works and academic researches.Keywords elementary school, parent-teacher conflict, awareness of parent-teacher         conflict, conflict management strategy
