台日韓三國產業股價指數報酬連動及其對個股報酬的影響
The Relationship among Industry Index Returns for Taiwan, Japan and South Korea in Conjunction with the Effects upon Individual Stock Returns
國家因子、產業因子、股價指數報酬、產業指數報酬、因果關係檢定、兩因子迴歸模型、兩階段迴歸模型
股價報酬究竟是受國家因子影響較大？或是產業因子影響較大？亞洲投資者若能充分了解主要台日韓三國股票分類市場間股價報酬的連動行為，便可根據產業標的做國際投資分散以達到提高投資報酬，以達到降低投資風險之目的。本研究以1994 1 6~2006 3 30台日韓三國大盤指數、產業分類股價指數、綜合產業指數、及其市值前五十大公司股價為資料，分析三國股價指數報酬與產業指數報酬之相關趨勢、三國股價指數報酬與產業指數報酬之因果關係以及國家因子與產業因子對股價報酬之影響。    本文採用因果關係檢定、兩因子迴歸模型、兩階段迴歸模型等研究方法，來分析台日韓三國產業股價指數報酬連動及其對個股報酬的影響。    實證結果為東京股價指數報酬明顯影響台灣加權股價指數報酬與韓國綜合股價指數報酬。以三國七大產業分類股價指數報酬來看，台日韓三國具有單向或雙向因果關係的涵蓋大部份的產業。經過兩因子迴歸分析後，台日韓三國市值前五十大公司的股價報酬皆明顯受到該國大盤指數報酬所影響，若以產業指數報酬對個股股價報酬的影響來看，台灣只有屬於BM及TE產業等公司，日本則涵蓋大部份產業的公司，韓國則包括BM、CG及TE產業等公司，其股價報酬明顯受到產業綜合指數報酬所影響；在兩階段迴歸模型中，先將台日韓三國市值前五十大公司的股價報酬與其所屬大盤股價指數報酬作迴歸後，其殘差項仍然被粽合產業指數報酬所解釋的產業的，台灣只剩下屬於具備產業成熟、標準化的BM產業公司及屬於權值較重的TE產業公司，日本公司則幾乎涵蓋所有產業，而韓國則有BM、CG及TE產業等公司。
Did stock market investment returns overwhelmingly influence by country factors, or industry factors? If and only if Asian investors can fully understand the implication among Taiwan, Japan and South Korea, they are able to verify the international diversification for every investment and perhaps result in an investment returns tantamount to industry targets, so as to achieve the goal of reducing investment risk. This research intends to utilize materials from three separate market indexes of the countries mentioned above. The three indexes are (1) Industry diversified indexes, (2) Industry comprehensive indexes and (3) The top 50-ranked companies’ stock prices – duration 1994 1 6 to 2006 3 30. Within this discourse, wish to illustrate our analysis for (1) the trend between the stock index returns and industry index returns; (2) the Granger Causality between the stock index returns; (3) the effects of stock returns from country factors and industry factors.     Methods of approach including Granger Causality Test, Two Factor Regression Models, Two Stage Regression Models to analyze the relationship among industry index returns for Taiwan, Japan and South Korea in conjunction with the effects upon individual stock returns.     The empirical results have shown that the TWSE and KOSPI Index returns are deeply affected by TOPIX Index returns. By scrutinize the relationships among seven major industries and their index returns, the relationships are said to be one-way or two-way causality contains most industries, respectively. Following the Two Factors Regression Models analysis, the stock returns of top 50 market values for companies within the three nations, one is able to determine the affect by its individual index returns. If one shall inspect the impacts on individual stock returns from comprehensive index returns for the three nations, that is, the BM and TE industry companies in Taiwan, almost every companies for all industries in Japan, and BM, CG, TE industries in South Korea. Next, the Two Stage Regression model analysis suggested that the stock returns of top 50-ranked companies in terms of their stock price returns have shown regression by its individual index stock returns, their residuals can also be explained by the comprehensive index returns.  Furthermore, certain developed industries, for example, standardized BM industry companies and heavy-weighted companies within TE industry in Taiwan, by contrast, virtually all companies within all industries in Japan, lastly, companies within BM, CG and TE industry in South Korea.
