台灣中小型營造業創業成功因素之探討
The Exploration of Success Factors for Entrepreneurs of Small and Median Construction Firms in Taiwan
營造業、創業精神、因素分析、RIDIT分析
台灣地區營造業在1990年以後由於房地產景氣不佳，現存營造業廠商家數過多，在政公共工程採最低價標的決標模式之下形成惡性的低價搶標，因此，在營造產業不景氣時更顯出家數過多的嚴重性，再加上我國加入WTO之後，政府公共工程招標必須對外開放的影響，營造業在此經營環境困難情形下，想要創業必定更加艱辛，所以如果要在目前的情況下創業，那麼有哪些因素是創業者必須充份加以掌握的，本研究希望藉由創業成功團隊的經驗，提供寶貴的意見，加以分析萃取出重要的創業成功因素，供有意創業的後進參考學習。本研究經由創業精神相關文獻的探討，以及營造業的特性因素與中小企業經營要素等，總合成台灣地區有關中小型營造業創業所必須注意事項，藉由研究創業成功相關的研究架構，整合為「創業團隊」、「產業環境」、「創業管理」等三個構面，並組成本研究之研究架構。各個構面藉由七至十個不等的衡量的變數，衡量受訪者對於個各構面因素的知覺，便於分析受訪者對於個別因素的重視程度。在創業團隊有年齡、學歷、專長、工作經驗、風險承受度、個性、創業典範等7項變數，在產業環境構面有創業時機、政府因素、租稅因素、人際網絡因素、創業地點、產業競爭因素、產品市場因素等7項因素，而在創業管理構面則有資金因素、財務控制與管理、組織結構、管理經驗、營運規劃、專業諮詢、產品與服務之品質、員工因素、行銷技巧、經營彈性等10項變數。本研究問卷再以李克特5等尺度為衡量方法，針對受測者的「知覺功能」對創業成功因素的重要性做度量，完成創業成功的衡量問卷。本研究對象為目前有經營實績之創業家或創業團隊成員為主，由於經濟因素考量以大台北地區為主，抽樣方式採用非機率抽樣之雪球抽樣法。問卷調查所採用的方法為結構-直接訪問(structured-direct interview)法，分析方法則採用因素分析法與RIDIT分析法，並應用SPSS12.0 for Windows及SAS 9.0統計軟體對回收之問卷結果進行資料整理及分析，並針對研究構念問項進行探索性因素分析，以確立本研究之創業評估的重要因素，亦分析創業者特性之差異與提出成功創業之應用策略。本研究嘗試以因素分析與RIDIT分析，從不同尺度與不同的分析方法來印證樣本資料，針對研究的結果，以因素分析與RIDIT分析的結果所萃取的重要因素並列比較，找出影響台灣中小型營造業創業成功之因素在不同分析中所得到的因素權數作一結論。
Since the recession in the real estate market in 1990, the construction industry in Taiwan had been competing bidding prices in government projects due to the excess number of construction companies. This kind of unhealthy competition is especially apparent in a recession. Furthermore, once Taiwan joins the WTO, the government construction projects’ bidding process needs to be transparent & open to the public. Under this kind of circumstance, it is even more difficult for new entrants to get its footing in this industry. One may ask what are the key success factors for the new entrepreneurs wishing to go into the construction industry? This study is to leverage the experience of the best practices, analyze them in detail to find these key success factors.This study looks into the archive of entrepreneurial leadership, the unique factors of the construction industry, and the business essentials of small-medium enterprises. These are then compiled into the key factors of a small-medium construction company. The structures of best practices are then sorted into 3 factors, namely, the start-up team, business environment, and business management.Each of the factors consists of 7 to 10 variables, the importance of these variables were determined by the perception of the interviewees. The start-up team has age, educational background, expertise, work background, risk averseness, characteristics, and business model as the 7 variables. The business environment has timing, government regulations, tax benefits, personal networks, location, competition, and market structure as the 7 variables. As to the business management factor, financial aspects, financial control and management, organizational structure, management expertise, business plan, consultation, quality of products and services, employee mix, marketing skills, and flexibility are the 10 variables included.The questionnaire used Likert Scale as the means of evaluation, and looked at the perceived value of the variables to determine the key success factors and their level of importance. The audiences were entrepreneurs and management teams with known track records. The scope was targeted at the greater Taipei region due to financial considerations. The sampling method used snowball sampling of the non-probability sampling method.The method of conducting the questionnaire was a structured-direct interview, the results were then analyzed using factor analysis and RIDIT analysis. SPSS12.0 for Windows and SAS 9.0 statistical tools were used for data analysis. The exploratory factor analysis was used to construct the framework and the key factors, and the differences were extracted and explained of the strategies used to create business success.The study attempts to use factor analysis and RIDIT analysis to examine the sample data from different aspects and statistical methods. The results from factor analysis and RIDIT are then compared to find the explanation of how the factor variables affect the success or failure of a Taiwanese small and medium construction company.
