台灣上市公司股權結構的決定因素
The Determinants of Ownership Structure in Taiwanese Listed Companies
股權結構、股份控制權、盈餘分配權、股份盈餘偏離差

台灣上市公司的控制股東經常透過交叉持股、金字塔結構等方式來增加控制權，使得外界對公司的股權結構很模糊。此外，我國家族企業的財務及股權結構的不透明化，導致1998年一連串的「地雷股」事件引爆，使得很多企業面臨破產，衍生了本土型的金融危機，有鑑於此，「公司治理」便成了一門顯學，而在公司治理議題蓬勃發展之時，更應回歸至最原始的問題－股權結構（即本論文中所稱“元問題”）。　　而Demsetz(1983)所提出之「股權結構內生假說」為股權結構提供一理論基礎。此假說乃認為股權結構本身並非一個獨立存在的外生變量，而是由政治、文化、法律、經濟和歷史等諸多因素共同作用而成的結果。再者，過去許多著名的文獻探討世界各國股權結構集中，且多為家族控股形態，並以股權結構去解釋董事會組成、投資、融資和股利政策，但都忽略一最根本的問題，即形成股權結構的成因為何，此一問題亦未有完整探討，同時有關股權結構的問題皆缺乏長期間的研究。　　是故，本研究主要以民國85年及民國93為研究年度，以台灣上市公司為研究樣本，探用傳統迴歸方法找出單年度影響股權結構的顯著變數。本論文主要自變數有總資產（公司規模）、資產報酬率、股東權益報酬率、負債比率、公司上市期間、市值、股價、產業別（電子及金融業）、研發支出占營收比率、產業龍頭股及P/B比；應變數有股份控制權、盈餘分配權和股份盈餘偏離差。除此之外，還以兩年度相減的變動額找出影響股權結構變動的因子。　　實證結果顯示：產業別（電子業和金融業）、獲利能力（ROA）、財富限制（公司規模大小、公司上市期間）會影響股權結構。而產業別的不同會影響股權結構，推論可能原因是電子產業所實施的「員工分紅配股制度」及金融業於民國90年11月成立的「金融控股法」影響了股權結構。此外，公司獲利能力的好壞也會影響股權結構。而財富限制中的公司上市期間愈長，在外流通的股數愈多會影響公司股份控制權及公司一旦通過上市績效的門檻限制，保持其經營績效的誘因消失，業績可能因此下滑，進而影響盈餘分配權。再者，公司規模較大的公司，由於大股東其個人資本的限制無法持有較高比率的股份，故持股率較低，亦即公司規模愈大，大股東所擁有的股份控制權較小（較分散）。且年紀愈大或上市愈久的古老公司，愈有可能受到家族的控制，控制股東愈有能力運用各種控制方法造成股份控制權和盈餘分配權偏離，故實證結果也顯示公司上市期間愈長，兩者的偏離差愈大。
The controlling shareholders of Taiwanese listed companies usually have voting right through cross-holding and pyramid structure, so outsiders’ images of ownership structure are very unclear. Moreover, the obscure finance and ownership structure of family firms cause a series of events to occur. Many companies go into bankruptcy or meet domestic financial crises. Owing to it, “corporate governance” has become a hot topic. At the same time, the original problem—ownership structure— should also be paid attention to.  Demsetz brought the issue to center stage in 1983 with the publication of endogenous ownership structure. This hypothesis provides a theoretical basis for ownership structure topics namely ownership structure is not a single and exogenous variable; instead it consists of politics, culture, law, economy, history and other factors. Furthermore, a lot of previous famous literature made thorough investigation of ownership structure all over the world and the results showed that in most countries ownership structure was concentrated and family-controlled. Besides, in the past academics used ownership structure to explain board of directors, investment, finance and dividend policy. However, they neglected a basic problem what elements contribute to ownership structure. So far this problem hasn’t had complete discussion and has been short of long-term researches.  This study use ownership data obtained from two directories published by Taiwan Economic Journal and data bank of corporate governance. The sample of this study has included 978 Taiwanese listed companies in 1996 and 2004. By conducting traditional simple regression analysis in this study. The discussion to this point has focused on the determinants of ownership structure. We now empirically find out that1.  I consider different industries a more explanation of ownership structure.2.  As significant relationship is found between company listed years and ownershipstructure. And empirical results of this research is also found that company listed years and deviation of voting right and cash flow right are positive relationship.3. Size of firm , as measured by total assets , is negatively related to ownership structure variables. As the value-maximizing size of the firm grows , both the risk-neutral and risk-aversion effects of larger size ultimately should weigh a more diffuse ownership structure , so that an inverse relationship between firm size and ownership structure variables is to be expected.
