台灣餐旅產業之社會網絡、知識移轉與新產品開發關係之研究—以組織支持與組織控制為干擾變項
The Relationships Among Social Network, Knowledge Transfer, andNew Product Development of Taiwan Hospitality Institutions Organizational Support and Organizational Control as Moderation Factors
部門、社會網絡、知識移轉、新產品開發、新服務開發、組織支持、組織控制
本研究主要的目的是探討旅館以部門為單位之社會網絡(直接接觸頻次、接觸範圍與連帶強度)、知識移轉、新產品和新服務開發、與組織因素之關係，其次的目的欲驗證「知識移轉」在「社會網絡與新產品和新服務開發關係」中所可能扮演的中介效果，而組織因素中之「組織支持」與「組織控制」這兩者是否都會對於「社會網絡與新產品和新服務開發之關係」產生干擾的效果。本研究是以台灣一般級以上之旅館從業一年以上的員工作為本研究分析對象，以部門中一位主管與至少兩位員工之數量作為樣本的單位，一共發出28家飯店之832份問卷，總計回收27家旅館之問卷，回收總計653份，問卷回收率為78.48%。剔除空白、漏答、作答不完全與問卷，實得有效問卷為402份，共127個部門有效問卷回收率為61.56%。  分析結果發現部門透過社會網絡(直接接觸的數量與接觸的範圍)對於「知識移轉」與「新產品和新服務開發」確實具有其影響；社會網絡之直接接觸的數量與接觸範圍、知識移轉、新產品與新服務開發之關係皆有顯著的正相關。部門擁有直接接觸頻次越多，以及接觸範圍越大，部門知識移轉的程度也越高。此外；知識移轉對於新產品與新服務開發有正向的影響關係，知識移轉給了部門相互學習的機會，部門可利用知識提升開發新產品與新服務的能力。換言之；移轉知識的部門能促進了部門在新產品與新服務開發的可能性。社會網絡之直接接觸與接觸範圍對於新產品開發產生顯著的正向相關。而社會網絡之連帶強度對於「知識移轉」與「新產品與新服務開發」並未產生顯著地正向的關係，因此部門緊密的關係並不會促使部門相互地移轉知識，也不會導致部門更多的新產品開發。  中介效果方面，研究結果發現「知識移轉」對於「直接接觸頻次與新產品和新服務開發的關係」產生中介的效果；「知識移轉」對於「接觸範圍與新產品和新服務開發的關係」產生中介的效果，「知識移轉」對於「連帶的強度與新產品飯新服務開發的關係」並未產生中介的效果。而干擾效果方面，研究結果顯示「組織支持」與「組織控制」對於「直接接觸頻次與新產品和新服務開發之關係」皆產生干擾的效果，而「組織控制」對於「接觸範圍與新產品和新服務開發之關係」產生干擾的效果，「組織支持」與「組織控制」對於「連帶強度與新產品和新服務開發之關係」並未產生干擾的效果，關鍵詞：部門、社會網絡、知識移轉、新產品開發、新服務開發、組織支持、組織控制
This study mainly wants to discover the relationships among hospitality departmental social network (direct contact number, network range, and strength of tie), knowledge transfer, new product and new service development, and organizational factors as organizational support and organizational control.  Secondly, we are interested in the meditating effects of knowledge transfer among departments between social network and new product and new service development。 Thirdly, we also research on organizational support and organizational control moderating the relationships between social network and new product and new service development.  Our data is collected from one departmental supervisor and least two subordinates as our standard sample.  We send 832 questionnaires to 28 hotels and return from 27 hotels with 653 questionnaires.  Only 402 questionnaires are fully completed and 127 departments were collected.  The returning rate is 61.56%.  Results show that social network (direct contact number and network range) influence knowledge transfer and new product and new service development.  There are directly positive relationships among social network (direct contact number, network range), knowledge transfer and new product and new service development.  Department with more direct contact numbers and bigger network range improve knowledge transfer.  Knowledge transfer between departments can also encourage better performance of the new product and new service development.  Besides, department with more direct contact numbers and bigger network range both can improve their performance of the new product and new service development.  Nevertheless, strength of tie has no directly positive relationship with both knowledge transfer and new product and new service development.  As to the mediation effects, we find out that knowledge transfer meditates both the relationship between direct contact number and new product and new service development, and between network range and new product and new service development.  With regard to the moderation effects, results show organizational support and organizational control both can moderate the relationship between direct contact number and new product and new service development.  Organizational control also moderates the relationship between network range and new product and new service development.  However, neither organizational support nor organizational control moderate the relationships between the strength of tie and new product and new service developmentKey word department, social network, knowledge transfer, new productdevelopment, new service development, organizational support,organizational control
