台灣壽險業公債投資組合策略之研究-以M個案公司為例
The Study of Bond Investment Portfolio Strategy –A Case of Taiwan Life Insurance Company
避險效果、投資組合、債券、部位

過去研究有關台灣壽險業投資組合策略，均以整體投資組合部位變動為主，從沒有論文以個案為主，討論個別公司投資現況、投資流程、資產配置及投資組合策略，為了彌補此方向的缺憾，本研究嘗試選取某一大型、具代表性壽險公司，藉由個案訪談方式，歸納整理其公債投資組合概念，以提供其它壽險業者在未來公債投資上之建議。本研究結論發現如下：一、台灣壽險公司無法有效運用債券免疫策略，達成資產負債之充分避險，必須輔以其他多元化積極型投資策略，以增加公司整體投資收益。二、M壽險公司採用買進持有到期策略，原則上不在市場賣出，只進行投資組合存續期間調整，除非公司有特定資金需求，才會賣出持有之公債部位。三、國內低利率環境下，公債投資收益偏低，而財政部之前為壽險業規劃發行30年期公債，因市場接受度不高，2004年已停止發行，其他如20年期公債一年僅標售兩期，金額約600-700億元，導致壽險業投資標的不足，這些因素，無形中都將提高壽險公司經營風險。四、M壽險因公司內部規定，以至於公債投資組合存續期間與Benchmark之間，有兩年落差，當經理人預期利率反彈時，通常無法大幅度降低部位存續期間來降低風險，造成投資組合資本損失，但由於資產與負債存續期間相同，使得損失準備金之值也同幅度上升，同樣達到避險效果。
Based on the past researches of investment strategies in Taiwan’s insurance industry, many of the discussions have supported the investment changes in insurance companies’ portfolios. Collectively, the examination of current investment conditions, investment objectives, and asset allocation strategies have been ignored.  This paper will attempt to analyze and provide a better representation of life insurance company’s portfolio and to induce its concepts of the bond investment.  Furthermore, this paper will attempt to provide future bond investment strategies to other life insurance companies.The conclusions of the research are as follows1.  The life insurance companies in Taiwan are prohibited from the use of bond immunity strategy effectively to reach the full hedge of their assets and liabilities.  Therefore, companies must use diversification of investment strategies in order increase their full investment profits.2.  The “M” life insurance company uses the strategy of holding the bond until maturity, it does not sell the bond in the secondary market, and only makes the adjustment of the duration in the investment portfolio. If “M” life insurance company has a special fund demand, it will sell the position of the bond.3.  The profit from the bond investment is lower due to the low interest rate in Taiwan. Since 2004, the 30 year bonds are no longer issued by the Ministry of Finance due to the low demand in the bond market. The low demand and low profits have caused operational risks for life insurance companies.4.  The internal rule of the “M” life insurance company stipulates a two- yearlag between the bond investment portfolio and Benchmark. When a portfolio manager expects the interest rate to rebound, he cannot reduce the duration of the investment portfolio to avoid the risk. Therefore, the investment portfolio will take a loss. However, since the durations of the assets and liabilities are equal, the loss will be within the same range as the result of the hedge strategy.
