台灣企業資訊倫理政策現況調查
A Survey of Current Situations of the Information Ethics Policies of Taiwan’s Corporations
企業倫理、資訊倫理、資訊倫理政策
本研究主要目的乃探討台灣企業資訊倫理政策的現況與影響，透過調查的方式以產業別（製造業、服務業、金融業）、規模大小、及使用電腦員工人數比例等三個向度來對企業資訊倫理政策進行分析研究，調查的主要構面包括企業資訊倫理政策的規範、形成與執行、資訊倫理政策對企業本身的影響、對其他企業推行資訊倫理政策的看法、資訊倫理政策的實際案例及未來規劃等。    本研究先以個案訪談的方式，針對5家不同類型的企業進行訪談，以對台灣企業資訊倫理政策實施現況進行初步的了解，之後則以2005年台灣製造業前600大企業、服務業前300大企業以及金融業前100大企業為調查樣本，透過紙本問卷及網路問卷進行資料的蒐集並進行統計分析。本研究選擇台灣三大產業的前1000大企業作為研究樣本之主因乃基於這些企業較有可能已經適度資訊化，因此調查其相關的資訊倫理法規與政策也較具可行性。    本研究回收的樣本共143個，有效問卷回收率為14.3%。研究結果顯示不同產業類型、不同規模、及使用電腦的員工人數比例不同之企業其資訊倫理政策實施狀況不盡相同。本研究共計歸納25點台灣企業資訊倫理政策實施現況的重要發現，包括90%以上的企業認為實施資訊倫理政策是必要的、60%以上的企業已制定獨立的資訊倫理政策、金融業對資訊倫理政策的規範比例最高、使用電腦員工人數比例越高的企業，對資訊倫理的規範也越重視、70%以上的企業沒有實施資訊倫理政策的相關測驗或考試、58.2%的企業有實施資訊倫理政策相關的教育訓練等。    本研究完整描述台灣企業資訊倫理政策的輪廓並對企業資訊倫理政策之制定、修正與執行提出具體建議。相信研究成果在學術與實務上皆能提供具有價值的參考資訊。
The main purpose of this study aims to survey the current situations of corporate information ethics policies in Taiwan. Relevant issues were examined from the following dimensions, namely, the content of regulations, the development and implementation of the corporate ethics policies, influences of the policies on the corporate governance, the perceptions of information ethics policies of the industry, and the future plans about information ethics policies.    Five corporate superintendents from different industries were personally interviewed. Results of personal interview provided a solid base for the formal survey of this study. To derive a preliminary understanding of the current situations of information ethics policies in Taiwan’s corporations, samples of the survey were Taiwan’s top 600 corporations in the manufacturing industry, top 300 corporations in the service industry, and top 100 corporations in the financial industry in 2005. Data were collected by paper-based and web-based questionnaires developed by the researcher. The main reason of choosing top 1000 corporations as samples was that they are supposed to have been computerized to some degree and accordingly the survey on their information ethics policies would be more practical.    Among the 1000 corporate samples, 143 returned questionnaires. It was found from the study that more than 60% of the corporations had already established independent information ethics regulations and the financial industry had ranked top 1 on the policy’s establishment. It was also found that corporations with higher rate of employee’s using computers tended to pay more attention to the information ethics policy. Also, 90.7% of the corporations indicated that it is very much necessary to establish information ethics policy, and 58.2% of the corporations had provided related education and training on the information ethics policies.    Results of this study provided a profile of the information ethics policies of Taiwan’s corporations and proposed suggestions and recommendations to facilitate policy’s establishment, revision, and execution. It was believed that the analytic results of this study could serve as valuable references in both academic and practice fields.
