台灣地區行動保全消費者目標市場之研究及其行銷組合需求探討
A Study of the Target Market of Mobile Security in Taiwan and the Demand of its Marketing Mix
行動保全、消費者行為、市場區隔、行銷組合
近年來，保全科技發展迅速，加上網際網路及電信通訊科技日新月異，電信業者已經能夠透過AGPS(Assisted GPS)定位技術，鎖定手機持用人的所在位置，隨時保障個人安全，這種將結合手機與保全功能的個人GPS定位服務，開啟個人行動保全的新紀元。因此本研究將探討消費者之保全經驗及其行動保全之消費者行為，並利用消費者之基本特性進行市場區隔，選擇具購買潛力之目標市場，進再建構目標市場偏好之行銷組合，以提供保全業者進行擬定行銷策略之參考依據。本研究以台灣地區23縣市為研究母體，採用層比例隨機抽樣法，針對家庭中有工作收入或有家庭經濟支配權的民眾進行電話訪問，共計1,076份有效樣本，本研究之結論敘述如下：一、消費者目前生活周遭安全維護狀況以左鄰右舍相互照應及依賴社區警衛巡邏為主，而家庭平均每月總月收入為110,001元以上者，相較於其他收入層家庭，有較高比例擁有家庭保全系統。二、消費者認為本研究之行動保全四大功能之緊急求救功能最為重要，其次為守護功能，再其次分別為簡易通話功能、查詢功能，以小孩、老人及女性為需求對象。三、本研究目標族群喜好之行銷組合如下：1.產品面：行動保全服務足夠且產品外觀及功能簡單即可。2.價格面：(1)較高比例之目標族群偏好租賃方式購買行動保全服務或產品；(2)在行動保全隨身手持設備費用及各種付費方式之基本服務費用方面，認為合理價格及可負擔價格存在落差之消費者，有較高比例認為合理價格大於其可負擔價格。3.通路面：以「一般通訊產品專賣店」、「各地電信營業門市」為主。4.推廣面：偏好電視廣告、商展與展示會及折價卷等推廣策略。四、屬於目標族群且未來考慮購買行動保全相關服務或產品之受訪者認為本人或其家人、同一住戶中的家中小孩、同一住戶中的家中老人、非同一住戶中的其他親人及同一住戶中的其他親人皆需要行動保全，其特性偏向東部地區，年齡為20~29歲，教育程度為專科以上，婚姻狀況為未婚，個人平均每月月收入為50,001元以上，其家庭平均總月收入為90,001元以上。
Recently, the security technology develop rapidly and the internet and communication technology change with each passing day. The communication vendors have develop the technology of located the person’s location by mobile phone by AGPS(Assisted GPS). This service provides people safety momentarily. It is the personal GPS position service which combines the function of mobile phone and security that the market starts the new century. To sum up, the objective of this research is to realize the security experience and mobile security consumer behavior of consumers and proceeds market segmentations by demographics in order to choose the most potential target market. Based on the result, the research will discuss the market mix of target market in order to provide some reference for security dealers to decide their marketing strategy.The research population is 23 countries of Taiwan and the respondents are people who have jobs or own the right of controlling economy in his own family. There are 1,076 valid questionnaires collected, using telephone interviewing with proportional stratified sampling. The conclusions and the suggestions of this research are listed as follows：1.The surrounding security of consumers relies on care with each other by neighborhood. Compared with other level of income, the family of which the average income per month in the family is above 110,001 N dollars has higher percentage of owning the family security system.2.Consumers view the most important function of mobile security is the emergent call function. The secondary important one is protection function. And simple communication function and enquiry function are the next. All services are focus on children, elders and females.3.The favorite marketing mix of target market are listed as follows(1)On the aspect of product, the services should be enough and the looks and function of product should be simple.(2)On the aspect of price, more target customers favor to purchase the services or products of mobile security by rental way.(3)On the aspect of place, more people mainly by this kind of product in special communication product shop and local telecommunications retail sales.(4)On the aspect of promotion, the target customers favor the television advertisements, product display and discount tickets.4.People who are target customers and they will consider to buy the mobile security services or products think that themselves and their families which are such as children, elders and other relatives living together or other relatives who don’t live together need mobile security. They tend to live in east area with the age of 20-29, the education of academyabove, no married, the personal average income per month of NTD$50,001 above, the family average income per month of NTD$90,001 above.
