台電公司營業區處技術人員核心職能辨識與職能表現關係之研究
The Relationship between Technician’s Core Competency and Performance –A Case Study of Taiwan Power Company’s Branch

台電公司
技術人員
核心職能


為順應環境的變遷及提升營運績效，台電管理團隊決定調整公司2004年的目標管理系統，依據平衡計分卡的精神、公司願景、營運策略、關鍵績效指標等，訂定了提高顧客滿意度、提高財物績效、落實社會關懷與安全管理、提升創新成效與能力等四個策略。為求扮演好顧客服務的角色，技術人員的工作成為重要的核心工作。本研究以文獻探討與深度訪談方式，蒐集與分析相關資料，發展出台電公司業務處技術人員核心職能量表的各個構面與衡量題項。正式施測時共發放248份問卷，實際回收186份，有效樣本175份，有效回收率為70.6％。接著進行問卷之信效度分析，結果顯示其效度係數介於0.533~0.816之間，而內部一致性係數(信度)介於0.939~0.925之間，最後得到6個核心職能構面，總計47個衡量題項。以此問卷量表經由相關分析、單因子變異數分析與迴歸分析方式，檢測其對技術人員績效表現的影響性。結果顯示以「主動積極」職能項目最能顯著預測技術人員的績效表現，其次依序為「緊急應變能力」、「分析式思考」、「公司服務年資」。本研究最後提出應用於人力資源管理實務之建議，提供個案公司人力資源規劃與運用之參考。
In order to cope with environmental changes and upgrade the company's operation performance, the management team decided to make adjustments in the company's 2004 MBO system. Based on the spirit of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) and the company's vision, operation strategy, key performance indicators, etc., formulated 4 strategies. They are as follows Raising Customer Satisfaction. Enhancing Financial Performance. Substantiating Care for Society and Safety Management. Upgrading Innovation Effectiveness and Capability. Technician’s service work is a core work to excel in providing customer service.This study adopted methods of literature and in-depth interviews, and collected related data to develop the aspects and items for Technician’s Core Competency Scale. In actual survey, a total of 248 surveys were distributed. A total of 186 surveys were returned, 175 were valid; the valid return rate was 70.6％. Then the data was analyzed for reliability and validity. The results showed the validity parameter between 0.533~0.816 and the internal consistency parameter (reliability) between 0.939~0.925. Lastly, 6 aspects of core competency and 47 items were obtained. The scale was analyzed with correlation analysis, ANOVA, and regression analysis to test the effects of the abovementioned aspects on the performance of Technicians. The results showed “Being proactive” as a competency could best predict the performance of Technicians, and”Emergent responsible ability”, “Analytical thinking”, “Work seniority” in consequence. Finally, suggestions on human resource management were provided based on the results as guidelines to human resource planning and application in the Branch of Taiwan Power Company.
