合成型擔保債權憑證—架構、風險與評等之探討
Synthetic Collateralized Debt Obligation - Structure, Risk and Rating
擔保債權憑證、合成型、信用違約交換、證券化、評等、信用增強、蒙地卡羅
論文摘要論文題目：合成型擔保債權憑證—架構、風險與評等之探討系所名稱：天主教輔仁大學 金融研究所碩士在職專班研究生  ：石政于指導教授：李阿乙 博士傳統型擔保債權憑證（Collateralized Debt Obligation, CDOs）屬於資產證券化商品，其資產池中包含多種類型的資產；合成型擔保債權憑證（Synthetic CDOs）則是結合了傳統型CDO與信用衍生性商品（Credit Derivatives）而成的合成型證券化商品。合成型CDO利用信用衍生性商品完成破產隔離機制，無須「真實出售」，有效降低了融資成本，以創始機構的角度觀之，運用合成型CDO可將風險自資產負債表移出，降低銀行的法定資本計提，提高銀行的資本適足率，法定資本使用上更有效率；以投資者的角度觀之，合成型CDO商品是一種低風險、高投資報酬率的選擇。本產品在國外已行之有年，近年來更是發展快速，台灣目前已有擔保債權憑證發行，受限於信用衍生性商品市場未臻成熟，尚未出現合成型擔保債權憑證，但其潛力不容忽視，本論文的目的在於以創始機構、投資者與評等機構的角度，全方位探討本商品的架構與風險，並將以案例模擬的方式，探討評等程序、信用增強水準與產品設計。
AbstractTitle of Thesis  Synthetic Collateralized Debt Obligation - Structure, Risk and RatingName of Institute Graduate Institute of Finance, Fu Jen Catholic UniversityName of Student Shih Cheng YuAdvisor Dr. Lee Ah YeeThe purpose of this thesis is to investigate the structure and risk of new synthetic CDO transactions from the perspectives of main market participants—sponsors, investors, and rating agencies.  Traditional Collateralized Debt Obligation (CDO) are structured financial products backed by a variety of debt obligations.  Synthetic CDO combines the securitization techniques with credit derivative strategy to produce a series of financial instruments.  It does not require “true sale” of the underlined assets, therefore the cost and the time for the transaction is much lower than traditional CDO transactions.  From a sponsor’s point of view, synthetic CDO has the advantage of transferring risk of the underlying assets to a counterparty without the legal complication of doing “true sale”.  Thus synthetic CDO can help a sponsor to release regulatory capital and increase capital adequacy ratio.  From an investor’s point of view, it offers a variety of investment opportunity with different level of risk and returns.In this thesis, I build a portfolio of debt obligations of Taiwanese firms and use it as the bases for simulation.  The simulation results are used for the purpose of tranching.
