員工認股權之會計處理—國際財務報告準則第二號(IFRSNo.2)之觀點
Accounting for Employee Share Options under the Framework of IFRS No.2
員工認股權、以股份為基礎的支付、國際財務報告準則第二號、員工股票增值權、指數型認股權、跨國所得稅、公平價值會計
本研究探討之主題「員工認股權之會計處理」係屬於IFRS No.2之以權益結算股份基礎的支付交易。本研究係依據IFRS No.2對員工認股權會計進行探討，輔以提供會計準則之訂定理由及辯論、釋例、揭露檢核表來說明員工認股權的認列、衡量及揭露。研究目的為提供我國發展員工認股權會計之參考，並期使符合國際會計準則之規範。有關員工認股權的衡量為IFRS No.2主要辯論的焦點，然而，目前尚無一個一般公認「正確」的衡量模型與技術，故IASB決定不提供一個衡量員工認股權的公認模型。IFRS No.2提供衡量員工認股權公平價值的條件及限制，並要求某些員工認股權之不同於一般認股權的特性應納入考量，當作認股權評價的特殊因素。再者，本研究依據IFRS No.2之規定，對於員工股票增值權、具有選擇現金結算權利的員工認股權及員工認股權的稅務會計處理，探討其會計處理以及會計準則之訂定理由。最後，本研究進一步以OECD之觀點，探討員工認股權有關跨國所得稅之稅務處理。
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) issued International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) No.2 “Share-based Payment” in 2004, requiring share-based payments to be classified into three categories (a) equity-settled, (b) cash-settled, and (c) equity-settled with cash alternatives. Furthermore, IFRS No.2 requires share-based payments to be measured at fair value and recognized as an expense. Under IFRS No.2, employee share options will be classified as equity-settled share-based payments.This thesis investigates accounting for employee share options under the framework of IFRS No.2. It focuses on extracting the rationales behind the heated debate over this controversial issue and the basis for IASB’s final conclusions. Examples and checklist are provided to explain the recognition, measurement and disclosure requirements of the standard. The purpose is to extract from this well-deliberated standard major guidance for the formulation of similar accounting standard(s) in Taiwan in the near future.Though measurement of employee share options is at the center stage of the controversy, given the fact that there is no generally accepted “correct” measurement model or technique so far, IASB decided against putting forth a model that could be considered a safe harbor measurement of employee share options. Instead, IFRS No.2 provides guidance on limitations and conventions for estimating the fair value of employee share options, and to be consistent, requires some of the unique features of employee share options be incorporated in the valuation.In addition, this thesis investigates accounting for employee share purchase plans and employee share-based payment arrangements with cash alternatives, as well as accounting for deferred taxes of employee share options under IFRS No.2. Again, the focus is on the rationales behind IASB’s final conclusions.Related to accounting treatment, this thesis also discusses cross-border income taxation issues arising from employee share options under the perspective of OECD.
