國小教師知覺與外籍配偶家長親師互動及其子女學校生活適應之相關研究
A Study on the Relationship between Teachers' Perceptions ofParent-Teacher Interactions with Immigrant Mothers andSchool Life Adjustments of Their Elementary School Children
國小教師、外籍配偶家長、知覺、親師互動、學校生活適應
本研究旨在探討國小教師知覺與外籍配偶家長親師互動及其子女學校生活適應之相關研究。主要的目的在於：一、國小教師知覺與外籍配偶家長親師互動及其子女學校生活適應之情形；二、探討不同教師背景變項在親師互動及其子女學校生活適應之差異情形；三、探討不同外籍配偶子女背景變項在學校生活適應之差異情形；四、探討教師及學童背景變項、親師互動與外籍配偶子女學校生活適應間之關係。本研究以問卷調查法來收集所需資料，問卷包含：一、個人基本資料；二、國小教師與外籍配偶家長親師互動量表；三、外籍配偶子女學校生活適應量表，以班級中有外籍配偶家長之台北縣市公立國民小學中、低年級導師為研究對象，共計發出292份，得有效問卷213份。所得資料以描述統計分析、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、皮爾遜積差相關分析及多元逐步迴歸等統計方法加以處理。依分析結果發現：一、教師知覺國小教師與外籍配偶家長親師互動情形普遍良好，其中以親師互動之多元    文化素養最佳，外籍配偶家長之親師互動情形較差。二、教師知覺外籍配偶子女在學校生活適應的情形普遍良好，並不如媒體報導的弱勢，    其中以常規適應最佳，學習適應較差。三、整體親師互動會因教師性別、參與多元文化進修研習不同而有所差異。四、外籍配偶子女學校生活適應會因學童性別、教師參與多元文化進修研習不同而有所    差異。五、教師知覺整體教師與外籍配偶家長之親師互動與整體外籍配偶子女學校生活適應達    顯著正相關。六、學童性別、與外籍配偶家長親師互動管道、親師互動之多元文化素養可以有效預測    外籍配偶子女學習適應；親師互動之多元文化素養、學童性別、外籍配偶家長之親    師互動情形可以有效預測外籍配偶子女師生關係；親師互動之多元文化素養及學童    性別可以有效預測外籍配偶子女之同儕關係、常規適應及自我適應。本研究最後根據研究結果提出建議，以供國小教師、外籍配偶家庭、教育主管機關與後續研究者之參考。
The purpose of this study is to investigate the teachers'perceptions  of parent-teacher interactions with immigrant mothers and school life adjustments of their elementary school children. The major goals of this study are listed below1.Understand teachers' perceptions of parent-teacher interactions  with immigrant mothers and school life adjustments of their  elementary school children.2.Investigate differences of the parent-teacher interactions with  immigrantmothers and school life adjustments of their elementary  school childrenaccounting for teachers’ background variables.3.Investigate differences in school life adjustments of elementary  schools on children’s background variables.4.Realize relations among the background variables of teachers,  children, parent-teacher interactions, and school life  adjustments.Three questionnaires designed by the author and utilized for data collection included1. Personal and demographic information2. Measurement of parent-teacher interactions with immigrant mothers3. Measurement of school life adjustments of their elementary school   children.The sample was from first to fourth grade teachers who have students of immigrant mothers in primary schools of Taipei city and county. Through purposive sampling, 292 teachers were surveyed, with 213 questionnaires accepted and effective for this investigation.Descriptive statistics, independent sample t-test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson correlation, and Stepwise Multiple Regression were computed for data analyses.According to the data analyses, the following results were described1.Most of the teachers' perceptions of parent-teacher interactions  with immigrant mothers were fine. The teachers perceived more in  multicultural literacy and less in parent-teacher communication  from immigrant mothers.2.Most of the teachers' perceptions of school life adjustments of  their elementary school children were fine. The children adjusted  better  in regular adjustment and the worse in learning adjustment.3.The parent-teacher interaction was significantly affected by  teachers’gender and in-service training in multicultural  education.4.The school life adjustment of the elementary school children was  significantly affected by gender of children and again by  teachers’ in-service training in multicultural education.5.The teachers' perceptions of parent-teacher interaction with  immigrant mothers and school life adjustments of their elementary  school children were significantly and positively correlated with  each other.6.Gender of children, methods of communication and multicultural  literacy effectively predicted the learning adjustment of  children. Multicultural literacy and gender of children, parent-  teacher from immigrant mothers could predict the teacher-student  relationship. Multicultural literacy and child gender could  predict the peer relationship, regular adjustment, and self  adaptation of the children.According to the findings and conclusions above, the study provided suggestions and references for elementary school teachers, the families of the immigrant mothers, education officers and future researchers.
