國小兒童田徑運動員與一般兒童心率變異度之比較
The comparison of heart rate variability between track and field team and normal subjects in elementary school pupils
心率變異度、時間指標、頻率指標、心肺耐力訓練
人們普遍接受規律的運動訓練對於身體是有益，然而，在短時間運動訓練，對於心臟副交感神經作用於國小學童身上的情形卻是未知。本研究的目的在探討國小學生在規律運動訓練下心臟血管控制機制。受試對象為三十六位國小健康的在學學生，分成沒有參加運動社團的八位四年級學生(9.75±0.46) 及十五位五年級學生(10.40±0.50)和參加田徑隊的八位四年級學生(9.87±0.35) 及十五位五年級學生(10.66±0.48)。四年級的田徑隊學生並沒有接受規律的運動訓練，僅以遊戲的方式增加其參與團隊的興趣；而五年級田徑隊的學生則是每週四次、每次一小時的運動訓練方式並且已持續六個多月。    在這四組學生中，非侵體性的心率變異度分析(HRV) 提供關於心臟副交感神經的活動資訊。利用心電圖（ECG）信號記錄仰臥平躺十分鐘並將所有資料經由時域指標(心跳間期平均值、相鄰兩心跳間的標準偏差和變異係數) 及頻域指標(總功率、高頻功率和低頻功率等)，再加上受試者八百公尺跑走的成績作為體適能心肺能力的參考依據。    接受規律運動訓練的組別在時域及頻域指標上與其他組別有明顯的不同。五年級田徑隊學生在心跳數（beats/min）、心跳間期平均值（mean）、兩相鄰心跳間超過50毫秒的比例（PNN50%）都與其他組別有顯著差異存在；頻域分析方面：五年級田徑隊學生則在高頻功率HFP與五年級一般生達到顯著差異，而高頻功率即與自律神經副交感神經的活性有關，顯示經由規律運動訓練之後會造成心臟副交感神經的活性增強，使每分鐘心跳數減少。研究結果顯示經過半年以上規律運動訓練的國小學生能夠提昇他們在心肺適能及心臟副交感神經活性的表現。
Regular exercise training benefits physical fitness is well accepted, however, the effect of short-term exercise training on cardiac parasympathetic activity in pupil population is unknown. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of regular exercise training on cardiovascular control mechanisms in elementary school pupils. Thirty-six healthy pupils were studied and divided into 8 fourth grades (9.75±0.46) and 15 fifth grades (10.40±0.50) sedentary, and 8 fourth grades (9.87±0.35) and 15 fifth grades (9.87±0.35) that joined the track and field team at school. Pupils who joined in the team were not seriously trained in a regular base, but more in fun play type at fourth grade, and 4 days a week, 1 hour per day training schedule was enhanced on fifth grade pupils who were in the team for 6 months.      Heart rate variability (HRV) provides non-invasive information about cardiac parasympathetic activity was evaluated in all four groups of pupils. ECG signals were recorded in supine position for 10 minutes. All data was calculated for the time domain variability indices (mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variation of R-R interval) and frequency domain variables (total power spectrum, high frequency and low frequency, etc.). All subjects were also performed an 800M run for the reference of the cardiorespiratory fitness.      Regular exercise training group showed significantly differences both in time domain and frequency domain when compared to other groups. The means of the R-R interval and its standard deviation (SDRR), the coefficient of variation of R-R interval, the percent of R-R intervals differing > 50 ms from the preceding R-R (PNN50), and the high frequency components of the autoregressive power spectrum of the R-R intervals (HFP) were all significantly higher in the regular exercise training group. The cardiorespiratory fitness level was also significantly higher than other three groups in the regular exercise training group. This data showed and suggested that a half-year of regular exercise training may benefit both of the cardiorespiratory fitness and the cardiac parasympathetic activity in pupil population.
