國民中學初任教師工作適應及其影響因素之研究
THE STUDY OF BEGINNING TEACHERS' WORK ADJUSTMENT AND IT’S INFLUENTIAL FACTORS IN JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS
工作適應、初任教師、公立國民中學

本研究旨在探討國中初任教師工作適應情形及其影響因素，經由文獻探討發現工作適應可分為「工作成熟」、「工作穩定」及「工作滿意」等三層面；而影響國中初任教師工作適應的因素可分為「個人影響因素」與「環境影響因素」兩大類。本研究主要使用問卷調查方式蒐集資料，抽取台北縣市58所公立國民中學，年資未滿五年之初任教師為研究對象，共計378個有效樣本。對於所得資料以描述統計、卡方考驗、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、皮爾森積差相關、共變數分析、二因子變異數分析、淨相關、多元迴歸分析等統計方法加以分析。研究發現國中初任教師的工作適應程度屬於中間偏高。影響因素中的人格特質、年齡、人際支持、職業導入等，與初任教師的工作適應皆達顯著正相關；而工作壓力則是和初任教師的工作適應呈現顯著負相關。男性初任教師的工作適應程度較女性佳，年資較大的初任教師，其工作適應程度較高，碩士學歷初任教師的工作適應程度優於學士學歷者，居住學校宿舍初任教師的工作適應程度優於獨自在外租屋者。然而宗教信仰的有無、學校規模的不同、班級人數的不同等因素，對於國中初任教師的工作適應程度不會造成顯著差異。而對於國中初任教師工作適應具有最佳預測力的影響因素為人格特質、人際支持、工作壓力以及職業導入。最後，研究者根據研究結果，對於教育主管行政機關、學校當局、初任教師以及未來研究提出若干改進建議。
The purpose of this study was to investigate the work adjustment for the beginning teachers from junior high schools and to explore it’s influential factors. According to the literature review, work adjustment was divided into three dimensions “vocational maturity”, “job stability”, and “job satisfaction”. The factors which affect work adjustment were divided into two parts including both “personal characteristics” and “environmental characteristics”. The study employed questionnaire in data collecting. There were 378 valid samples, from 58 public junior high schools in Taipei metropolis, who were beginning teachers and having taught for less than 5 years. Statistics methods including descriptive statistics, chi-square test, t-Test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson’s product-moment correlation, ANCOVA, two-way ANOVA, partial correlation, multiple regression analysis were used to analyze the data.The research found that beginning teachers’ work adjustment in junior high schools was slightly higher than average level. Regarding the influential factors, there were significant and positive correlations among personality, age, interpersonal support, and occupational induction in work adjustment of junior high school beginning teachers; but work stress was significantly negative correlated with work adjustment. Males’ work adjustment degrees were better than females’. The ones who had higher seniority were better in work adjustment degree, had Master’s degrees were better than those had Bachelor’s degrees, living in school dorms were better than those tenanting alone in outside. However regardless of the present situations in religious background, school’s size, or student numbers, there were no significant differences in work adjustment of beginning teachers in junior high schools. Personality, interpersonal support, work stress, and occupational induction were the best predictors to work adjustment of beginning teachers in junior high schools. Finally, further discussion was made on the basis of the previous findings, and suggestions about the education administrative agencies, the school administrators, the beginning teachers, and future researches were offered.
