國民小學藏書票教育實施現況之研究-以臺北縣為例
A STUDY ON THE STATUS QUO OF EXLIBRIS EDUCATION IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI COUNTY
藏書票、藏書票教育、藏書票教育實施現況
摘 要本研究旨在調查並分析臺北縣公立國民小學藏書票教育實施的現況，並提出結論與具體建議，期能提供國民小學藏書票教育實施之參考。本研究採問卷調查法，以臺北縣公立國民小學教師為研究對象，依比例以分層隨機抽樣方法收集資料，共發出問卷699份，回收問卷522份，扣除無效問卷8份，問卷可用率為73.7﹪。調查結果以次數分配表及百分比、平均數、標準差、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、薛費氏事後比較等統計分析法，進行資料處理分析。從研究得知臺北縣公立國民小學藏書票教育實施現況結論如下：一、教師在活動的認同程度屬中上。二、活動的推展得分亦屬中上程度。三、學校對藏書票教育的支持程度為中上。四、教師對教學資源的知覺為中間程度。五、教師對藏書票的知能為中下程度。六、藏書票教學實施狀況不佳。七、教師知覺藏書票教育實施因服務年資、畢業科系、學校規模、擔任職務及藏書票學習及專業背景的不同而有所差異。根據研究結果，提出以下之具體建議，提供中央教育行政機關、臺北縣國民小學實施藏書票教育、師資培育機構及未來研究方向之參考。壹、對中央教育行政機關的建議一、中央教育機關宜多宣導藏書票教育的內涵及功能。二、舉辦全國性藏書票徵件競賽。三、  設立各縣市藏書票教育資源中心。貳、對臺北縣國民小學實施藏書票教育之建議一、活動的推展方面（一）教育單位應繼續辦理藏書票相關活動。（二）與異業結合開創藏書票的新天地。二、行政支持度方面      （一）多舉辦藏書票教育研習與研討。      （二）藏書票教學師資應專才專用。三、活動的認同方面（一）全縣應規範藏書票徵件競賽送件數。      （二）結合語文領域，達到閱讀的推廣功能。四、教學資源      （一）行政單位人員應具備藏書票知能。      （二）增印藏書票作品專輯，並接受教師訂購。五、教師專業能力方面（一）藏書票專業技能。（二）優良藏書票教學設計徵稿。六、課程實施      （一）編寫藏書票教學課程。（二）將藏書票教育納入校本課程。叁、對師資培育機構及推動藏書票之建議      （一）師資培育機構與國小進行教學合作      （二）鼓勵修習學士或碩士學位之學生進行藏書票教育之相關研究      肆、針對未來研究之建議（一）可進一步探討比較藏書票與版畫的關係。（二）可進一步探討藏書票的藝術特色與人文內涵。（三）可進一步探討分析藏書票的創作技法。關鍵字：藏書票、藏書票教育、藏書票教育實施現況。
A STUDY ON THE STATUS QUO OF EXLIBRIS EDUCATIONIN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI COUNTYLI,CHIOU-LEEABSTRACTThe purpose of this study is to probe and analyze the status quo of the exlibris education in public elementary schools in Taipei County, and then to present conclusions and concrete suggestions which are expected to be a reference for the implementation of exlibris education in elementary schools.  Questionnaire survey was adopted in this study, and the studied targets were the teachers of the public elementary schools in Taipei County.  Totally 699 copies of questionnaires were sent out to those chosen by stratified random sampling, and 522 copies were recollected.  Taking of the 8 invalid copies, the availability was 73.7%.  The collected data was analyzed with frequency, percentage, mean, standard deviation, t-test, one-way ANOVA and Scheffes' Poster Test.  The conclusions of this study are as follow1.  Teachers’ recognition with exlibris activities is above medium level.2.  The grading of the promotion of exlibris activities is also above medium level.3.  The support from schools to exlibris education is above medium level.4.  Teachers’ awareness to the resources of exlibris education is in the middle level.5.  Teachers’ knowledge to exlibris is below medium level.6.  The status quo of exlibris education is not in an ideal condition.7.  There are differences in the awareness of exlibris education among teachers according to their tenure, educational background, position, the scale of the school, and whether they have learned about exlibris.According to the outcomes of this study, suggestions are made to the central education administrations, public elementary schools and organizations which foster teachers, as a reference for future implementation and study for exlibris educationI. Suggestions to the central education administrations1. Enhance the promotion of the content and function of exlibris education.2. Hold national contest for exlibris design.3. Establish exlibris educational centers in every city and county.II. Suggestions to the elementary schools in Taipei County1.  On promotion activitiesA.  Educational organizations should give continuously activities related to exlibris.B.  Cooperate with xxx to open a new vision of exlibris.2.  On administration supportA.  Hold workshops and forums of exlibris.B.  Hire professional exlibris teachers for exlibris course.3.  On recognition of exlibrisA.  Set regulations for the quantity of exlibris design in every contest.B.  Combine with language teaching in order to promote reading.4.  On teaching resourcesA.  Administration staffs should possess the knowledge of exlibris.B.  Publish special edition of exlibris works for teachers’ subscription.5.  On teachers’ professional abilitiesA.  Enhance teachers’ professional skills of exlibris.B.  Hold contests of exlibris course design.6.  On exlibris courseA.  Edit exlibris course syllabus.B.  Include exlibris course as an obligatory course.III. Suggestions to organizations which foster teachers and to the promotion of exlibris1.  The organizations which foster teachers should cooperate with elementary schools in teaching exlibris.2.  Encourage academics or postgraduates there to do research on exlibris education.IV. Suggestions to future study1.  Further study on the relationship between exlibris and block printing is recommended.2.  Further study on the art features and humanity of exlibris is recommended.3.  Further study on the analyses of exlibris skills is recommended.Key words exlibris, exlibris education, the status quo of exlibris education
