國民小學校長營造教師社群行為與教師專業社群表現關係之研究
THE STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRINCIPALS' BEHAVIORS OF BUILDING TEACHER'S COMMUNITIES AND THE TEACHERS' PERFORMANCE OF PROFESSIONAL COMMUNITIES IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
社群、專業社群

本研究之主要目的為瞭解國民小學校長營造教師社群行為與教師專業社群表現之現況，及兩者之關係。並分析不同背景變項之校長與教師分別對營造教師社群行為、教師專業社群表現的差異情形，以及學校規模變項在校長營造教師社群行為與教師專業社群表現的差異情形。本研究採用問卷調查法，以台灣地區台北市、台北縣348所公立國民小學教師為母群體，依學校規模大小以分層隨機抽樣進行調查，中型學校每校抽取8名教師、較大型學校每校抽取12名教師、大型學校每校抽取15名教師，總計913名教師，回收問卷總數為652份，其中有效問卷644份，總回收率為71.41%，有效樣本佔70.53%。調查結果以描述統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析及皮爾森積差相關進行分析，研究結果發現：一、國民小學校長營造教師社群行為之得分為中上程度，其中以「鼓勵教師投入」最高，「建立學習文化」最低。校長之年齡、學校規模對校長營造教師社群行為有差異存在。二、國民小學教師專業社群表現之得分為中上程度，其中以「共同聚焦在學生學習」最高，次高為「共享規範與價值」，「合作」最低。教師之性別、服務年數及擔任職務、學校規模對教師專業社群表現有差異存在。三、國民小學校長營造教師社群行為與教師專業社群表現具中度正相關。校長營造教師社群行為整體層面、「建立學習文化」層面與教師專業社群表現整體層面之間達中度正相關。而「參與式領導」、「鼓勵教師投入」為中低度正相關。四、校長營造教師社群行為中的各層面皆與教師專業社群表現中「共享規範與價值」相關最高，相關次高為「合作」，再者為「公開地實踐」。而教師專業社群表現中的各層面皆與校長營造教師社群行為中「建立學習文化」相關最高，其次為「鼓勵教師投入」，最低者為「參與式領導」。
The purpose of the research was to understand the status quo of the principals' behaviors of building teacher's communities and the teachers' performance of professional communities in elementary schools, and their relationship.  Based on questionnaire survey, which took the teachers serving in the 348 elementary schools in Taipei City and Taipei County as population, questionnaires were sent to those chosen with stratified random sampling according to the scale of the school.  The total copies sent was 913, and 652 copies were returned.  The responding rate was 71.41%. Eliminating the invalid copies, there were 644 copies.  The availability is 70.53%.  The data collected from the valid copies were analyzed withdescriptive statistics, t-test, one-way ANOVA, and Pearson product-moment correlation.  The outcomes of the study were as follow1. The overall“principals' behaviors of building teacher's communities” in elementary schools was high, and “encouragingteachers' participation”was the highest in this dimension.  Principal's age at 41~50 was higher than age at more than 51 in“encouraging teachers' participation”dimension.  And the“principals' behaviors of building teacher's communities”of thelargest scale of the school was higher than other scale of the school.2. The overall“teachers' performance of professional communities”in elementary schools was high, and“focusing on student's learning”was the highest in this dimension; however,“collaboration”was the lowest.  The female teachers were higher than male teachers.  The teachers of the seniority was more than 26 years were higher than the seniority was under 5 years and 5~10 years in“collaboration”dimension.  Homeroom teachers were higher than director, full-time teachers, and team leaders.  And the“teachers' performance of professional communities”of the largest scale of the school was higher than other scale of the school in“shared norm and values”dimension.3. There was medium correlation between“principals' behaviors of building teacher's communities”and“teachers' performanceof professional communities”in elementary schools.  The dimension of“embedding learning culture”and“teachers' performance of professional communities”had medium correlation. “Participation leadership”and“encouraging teachers' participation”had medium to low correlation.4. There was the highest correlation between every dimension of“principals' behaviors of building teacher's communities”and“shared norm and values”.  And there was the highest correlation between every dimension of“teachers' performance of professional communities”and“embedding learning culture”.
