國民中學國文教科書編排設計之易讀性與閱讀眼動研究
The Study of Layout Legibility and the Eye Movement in Reading of Junior High School Chinese Textbook
教科書、編排設計、易讀性、閱讀、眼動
本論文的研究目的為探討現行國民中學國文教科書，何種課文注釋的編排設計對閱讀易讀性最有利，並對現行教科書之字體、文字排列方式進行改良設計實驗，以探討其易讀性。研究上共設計十個實驗，實驗一、實驗二、實驗三主要探討注釋字的字體色彩，以及課文注釋的分欄對易讀性影響，分別採用閱讀時間控制法、語意差別法測量及眼動觀察法實驗進行；實驗四、實驗五為探討字體種類對易讀性的影響，分別採用閱讀時間控制法與語意差別法測量進行；實驗六、實驗七則探討文字排列方式對易讀性的影響，分別採用閱讀時間控制法、語意差別法測量進行；實驗八、實驗九、實驗十將字體及排列方式兩變項對易讀性的影響共同探討，分別採用閱讀時間控制法、語意差別法測量及眼動觀察法實驗進行。    主要研究結果為：1.課文與注釋的編排設計，在客觀測量（閱讀時間控制法、眼動觀察法）與主觀評量（語意差別法測量）上，獲得一致性的結果，以課文在上注釋在下的上下兩欄設計，優於課文在右注釋在左之左右兩欄設計；課文注釋編排設計注釋字變色與否，在易讀性上是沒差異的。2.字體編排設計方面，閱讀時間控制法、語意差別法測量，及眼動觀察法實驗三者呈現不一致的結果：閱讀時間控制法，其結果為宋體與楷體沒差異；語意差別法測量顯示，楷書字體的易讀性較宋體易讀性高；眼動觀察法則顯示宋體與楷書兩字體沒差異。3.文字排列設計方面，閱讀時間控制法、語意差別法測量及眼動觀察法實驗三者呈現不一致的結果，閱讀時間控制法的結果顯示橫式排列優於直式排列；語意差別法測量結果為直式排列較橫式排列易讀性佳；眼動觀察法則顯示兩種排列方式沒差異。
The purpose of this study is to find the effectiveness of the legibility of Junior high school current Chinese textbook about their text-footnotes, character style and line layout. The study includes ten experiments. Experiment 1, experiment 2 and experiment 3 are studies the footnotes character color and text-footnotes columns layout legibility’s effect by using the individual methods of control of reading time, semantic different scale (the subjective preference evaluation), and eye movement registration. Experiment 4 and experiment 5 by using the different methods of control reading time and semantic different scale to find out Ming and Kai character layout legibility’s effect. Experiment 6 and experiment 7 are using the methods of control reading time, and the semantic different scale to find the vertical and horizontal text layout legibility’s effect. Next three experiments are the studies of the layout legibility’s effect of the character style and vertical/horizontal line. These are the two independent variables by using different methods of reading time control, semantic different scale and eye movement registration in experiment 8, experiment 9 and experiment 10.    Three major results of the studies are：First, the legibility of text-footnotes layout, in all these methods the reading time control, semantic different scale and eye movement registration have consistency results. The vertical layout (top-text/bottom-footnotes) is better than horizontal layout (right-text/left-footnotes). And to change the color of footnotes or not has no different in layout legibility. Second, the legibility of character style, in reading time control, semantic different scale and eye movement registration has no consistent results. In reading time control the Ming and Kai has no significant effect. In semantic different scale the Kai is batter than Ming. And the method of eye movement registration the Ming and Kai has no significant effect. Finally, the legibility of line’s layout, in reading time control, semantic different scale and eye movement registration, these experiments get the results of inconstancy. In reading time control the horizontal is batter than vertical, the semantic different scale the vertical is batter than horizontal, and the eye movement registration the horizontal and vertical has no significant effect.
