國民小學九年一貫教學輔導團團隊凝聚力與團體層次組織公民行為關係之研究
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GROUP COHESIVENESSAND ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP BEHAVIOR IN TEAM LEVELFOR THE GUIDING TEAMS OF THE NINE-YEAR-JOINED INSTRUCTION IN THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
團體層次組織公民行為、團隊凝聚力、九年一貫教學輔導團

本研究主要目的在了解國民小學九年一貫教學輔導團團隊凝聚力與團體層次組織公民行為之現況展現，並解釋兩者之間的關聯性。本研究採問卷調查法，研究對象係以台灣四縣市包含台北縣、市、基隆市以及桃園縣七大領域之教學輔導團團隊成員為調查對象，共計發出問卷332份，回收有效問卷198份。資料利用描述統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析、積差相關以及多元迴歸等統計方法加以分析。由研究結果得到以下結論：（1）國民小學九年一貫教學輔導團團隊凝聚力與團體層次組織公民行為現況呈現高程度；（2）年資、年齡、教育程度、職稱對於輔導團團隊凝聚力展現無顯著差異；（3）性別、年齡、教育程度、職稱對於輔導團團體層次組織公民行為展現無顯著差異；（4）國民小學九年一貫教學輔導團團隊凝聚力與團體層次組織公民行為有顯著相關；（5）社會凝聚力為團體層次組織公民行為之最佳預測因素。根據研究結果，建議教育主管機關重新審核輔導團任務職責及學校任教時數；獎勵資深輔導團成員；規劃適當之輔導團團隊人數規模。建議輔導團召集人重視團隊凝聚力之形成；適當調整任務降低團員的負擔以提升工作凝聚力；增加輔導團成員互動機會以強化社會凝聚力；以資深團員帶領資淺成員以增加團隊之組織公民行為；適時化解團隊衝突以維持團隊凝聚力；有效激發團隊凝聚力避免集體迷思。
The purpose of this study was to investigate the current condition of the group cohesiveness and the organizational citizenship behavior in team level for the guiding teams of the nine-year-joined instruction in the elementary schools, as well as to examine the relationship between the group cohesiveness and the organizational citizenship behavior. Questionnaire survey method was used in the study. The research subjects were the members of guiding teams in seven major subject areas in Taipei city, Keelung city, Taipei county and Touyuan county.  There were 332 copies of the questionnaire sent and with 198 valid responses received.  Data were analyzed by using the method of descriptive and inferential statistics, including means and standard deviations, t-tests, product-moment correlations, one-way ANOVA, and stepwise multiple regressions.There were several findings in the present study. First of all, the performance of the group cohesiveness and the organizational citizenship behavior in team level were high. There were no significant differences in different age groups of members, the lengths of work experiences, the degrees of education, and job titles in the group cohesiveness. There were also no significant differences in gender, different age groups of members, the lengths of work experiences, the degrees of education, and job titles in the organizational citizenship behavior of team level. The group cohesiveness and the organizational citizenship behavior in team level were significantly positive correlated.  As a whole, the social cohesiveness was the best predictor to predict the organizational citizenship behavior in team level.According to the above conclusions, the study suggests that the Bureau of Education should review the task and responsibility in guiding teams, provide rewards to inspire the senior members, reorganize the group size of the guiding teams.  The leaders of the guiding teams should emphasize the development of group cohesiveness, adjust the work loading and reduce task burdens of the team members, increase interactions among team members in order to enhance social cohesiveness.  The leaders of the guiding teams can also adopt mentoring function, reconcile the conflict at the right moment to maintain cohesiveness and improve the group cohesiveness in order to prevent groupthink.
