國民中學訓導主任角色壓力,人際關係與壓力因應策略之研究
A STUDY ON THE DIRECTORS' ROLE STRESS, INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS AND THEIR STRESS COPING SRATEGIES FOR JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT AFFAIRS IN TAIWAN.
國中訓導主任、角色壓力、人際關係、壓力因應策略
摘 要本研究之主要目的在探討臺灣地區國中訓導主任的角色壓力、人際關係與壓力因應策略。本研究採問卷調查法，以服務於臺灣地區公立國民中學之訓導主任為研究對象採取普查方式進行。調查工具為「國民中學訓導主任工作經驗問卷」，問卷內容分為個人背景資料、角色壓力量表、人際關係量表、壓力因應策略量表四部份。正式問卷合計發出699份，回收568份，有效問卷為564份，佔研究樣本總數的80.68﹪。施測後所得資料分別以平均數、標準差、百分比，以及t檢定、單因子變異數分析、Pearson積差相關等統計分法加以比較分析。本研究首先調查國中訓導主任的角色壓力感受、人際關係情形以及面對壓力時所採取的主要因應策略；其次比較不同背景變項的國中訓導主任在角色壓力感受、人際關係情形以及主要壓力因應策略的差異情形；最後探討國中訓導主任角色壓力、人際關係以及壓力因應策略三者間的相關程度。本研究得到的重要發現包括：一、國中訓導主任感受的角色壓力程度為中等程度。二、國中訓導主任與校內同仁間的人際關係程度為優良程度。三、國中訓導主任面臨壓力時的主要因應策略為問題解決策略。四、年齡較輕、累計訓導主任年資較少者感受較大的角色壓力。五、不同背景的國中訓導主任採取的主要壓力因應策略類型各有差異。六、不同背景的國中訓導主任與校內同仁間的人際關係程度各有差異。七、國中訓導主任的角色壓力與人際關係呈中度負相關。八、國中訓導主任的角色壓力與壓力因應策略的不同層面各有相關。九、國中訓導主任的人際關係與壓力因應策略的不同層面各有相關。根據研究結果對教育主管機關、學校行政單位、訓導主任個人及未來的研究提出具體建議。關鍵字：國中訓導主任、角色壓力、人際關係、壓力因應策略
A STUDY ON THE DIRECTORS’ ROLE STRESS, INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS AND THEIR STRESS COPING SRATEGIES FOR JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT AFFAIRS IN TAIWANLI, CHING-POABSTRACTThe purpose of this study was to examine the role stress, interpersonal relations and stress coping strategies of the directors for student affairs in junior high school in Taiwan. All the directors in junior high school student affairs in Taiwan were investigated by “the questionnaire of the working experience of the directors in junior high school student affairs.” The questionnaire consists of four parts personal background, role stress, interpersonal relations and stress coping strategies. 699 copies in all were sent out and 568 copies were sent back. The valid questionnaires were up to 564 copies, so the retrieval rate was 80.68%. After coding all the data, the researcher used “average number, standard criterion, percentage, the T-test, one way ANOVA, and Pearson product-moment correlation” to analyze these data.First, the researcher surveyed the perception of role stress, level of interpersonal relations and the main stress coping strategy of the directors in junior high school student affairs. Second, compared the difference of the perception of role stress, level of interpersonal relations and the main stress coping strategy of the directors in junior high school student affairs with different background variables. Finally, investigated the relations among role stress, interpersonal relations and the main stress coping strategy of them.The important conclusions of this research were1.The perception of role stress of the directors in junior high school student affairs wasin “the medium level.”2.The level of interpersonal relations of the directors in junior high school studentaffairs with their school partners was in “the wonderful level.”3.The main stress coping strategy of the directors in junior high school student affairswas “Problem solving.”4.The younger and less experiences of the directors in junior high school student affairshad higher perception of role stress.5. Different personal background influenced the main stress coping strategy of them.6. Different personal background influenced the level of interpersonal relations of themwith their school partners.7.There was medium negative correlation between the perception of role stress and thelevel of interpersonal relations.8.There were different correlations between the perception of role stress and the different stress coping strategies.9.There were different correlations between the level of interpersonal relations and thedifferent stress coping strategies.Based on the conclusions, recommendations of future research and applications for the educational administration, school administration sections, and the director individuals in junior high school student affairs were made.Key words The directors in junior high school student affairs, Role stress,Interpersonal relations, Stress coping strategies.
