國民小學家長參與校務因素與類型之研究—以臺北縣為例
THE STUDY ON THE FACTORS THAT AFFECT PARENTAL PARTICIPATIONS AND THEIR INVOLVED ACTIVITIES OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL PARENTS－AN EXAMPLE OF TAIPEI COUNTY
家長參與、家校合作

本研究旨在探討國民小家長對於參與校務的認知、對家長參與的類型及家長參與校務的因素之看法，並提出國小家長參與校務之建議。研究方法以問卷調查法為主，以臺北縣國民小學家長家長為母群體，分層隨機抽取1070名家長進行施測，有效樣本為867位家長。所得資料使用次數分配、百分比、平均數、標準差、獨立t檢定及單因子變異數分析等統計方法進行資料分析。茲歸納本研究的主要結論如下：一、國民小學家長對於參與校務秉持正向認同的態度。二、國民小學家長參與校務的認知因個人變項不同而有所差異。三、影響家長參與校務的因素中，以「家庭因素」最高。四、「家庭因素」影響國民小學家長參與校務，因性別、公私立學校、學校規模不同而有所差異。五、「學校因素」影響國民小學家長參與校務，因教育程度與家庭收入不同而有所差異。六、「目的因素」影響國民小學家長參與校務，因學校規模不同，而有所差異。七、「環境因素」影響國民小學家長參與校務，因性別、學校區域不同而有所差異。八、以家長參與校務類型的程度而言，「班級校務活動」的參與高於「校務決策發展」的參與。九、在家長參與校務的類型中，會因家長的教育程度、學校所在地及學校規模的不同而有所差異。十、「目的因素」及「學校因素」影響家長參與校務的類型與內容有所差異。
The main purpose of this study was to explore the understanding of the parental participation of elementary school affairs, to explore the types of involving elementary school affairs, to explore the factors of the parental participation of elementary school affairs and to provide suggestions about this study.This study used questionnaire survey as main research method. The subjects were the elementary school parents in Taipei County. According to the scales of the elementary schools, 1070 parents were random stratified sampled. The valid samples were 867 parents. Data were analyzed with SPSS 12.0, including frequency distribution, percentage, mean, standard deviation, t-test and One-way ANOVA.The major findings were as follows1.  Elementary school parents had a positive attitude toward involving elementary school affairs.2.  The understanding of the parental participation of elementary school affairs varied with individual variables.3.  Among all the factors of the parental participation of elementary school affairs, “Family Factor” reached the most significant difference.4.  “Family Factor” influenced the parental participation of elementary school affairs and varied with sex, public or private schools and the scales of the schools.5.  “School Factor” influenced the parental participation of elementary school affairs and varied with the level of education and family incomes.6.  “Purpose Factor” influenced the parental participation of elementary school affairs and varied with the scales of the schools.7.  “Environment Factor” influenced the parental participation of elementary school affairs and varied with sex and the regions of the schools.8.  As far as the types of involving elementary school affairs were concerned, the level of participating in class affairs is larger than that in school strategies of development.9.  In the types of the parental participation of elementary school affairs, there would be different according to the level of parents’ education, the location of school and the scales of the schools.10.  “Purpose Factor” and “School Factor” influenced the parental participation in the types and the context of elementary affairs.Keywords Parental Participation, Parent Involvement, Home-School Cooperation
