國際觀光旅館外賣專櫃品牌延伸契合度對消費者行為意向之影響
Effects of Brand Extension Fit on Consumers’ Behavior Intention in International Tourist Hotel Outside Catering
旅館外賣、品牌延伸契合度、行為意向
餐旅業之行銷走向多元化，除了旅館本身產品之外，更多元化的推出一系列外帶外賣產品吸引消費者與提高旅館知名度與銷售。本研究之目的為探討消費者對於國際觀光旅館品牌延伸之認知與延伸產品偏好，並探究延伸契合度對消費者行為意向之影響，且期望透過本研究縝密研究後，對旅館業者之經營有所助益。本研究針對國際觀光旅館之消費者為研究對象，以北部地區某國際觀光旅館所設立之外賣專櫃為主，對該區之消費者進行現場發放問卷與回收，共發放224問卷，並利用統計軟體 SPSS 10.0與 AMOS 5.0 作量化分析與探討。此外，亦針對旅館業者進行深度訪談，探究旅館進行品牌延伸策略之決策考量因素、執行困難程度與未來經營方向。研究結果歸納如下：1.母品牌屬性影響消費者對延伸產品之認知評價。2.母品牌偏好、品牌延伸契合度皆影響延伸產品偏好，而母品牌屬性則透過認知評價影響延伸產品偏好，且教育程度對延伸產品偏好有顯著差異。3.延伸產品偏好影響消費者之行為意向，每月平均所得對行為意向有顯著差異。建議旅館業提供創意且多元化之產品，並增加產品價格之彈性與消費者購買產品管道之方便性。此外，服務品質亦是影響消費者購買之重要因素，因此，建議提供專業之服務人員訓練，以提升消費者之青睞。
Marketing in hospitality industry becomes diversity.  Hotels have products itself and release a series of take-out goods to attract consumers and exalt hotel popularity and sale.  The main purpose of the study is to explore consumer’s cognition of the brand extension in International Tourist Hotel, and analysis the influence of brand extension fit of the consumer behavior intention. The results of this study would be helpful to hotel practitioners.The samples were consumers of International Tourist Hotel's in north of Taiwan.  Two hundred and twenty four questionnaires were distributed; the valid data were analyzed using SPSS 10.0 and structural equation modeling through AMOS 5.0.  In addition, the research conducted in-depth interview of a hotel operator to investigate hotel’s brand extension strategy, the execution difficulty and the future operation direction.The study results were as following highlights1.Consumers’ cognition on extended products was affected by original brand property.2.Consumers’ preference of extended products was affected by original brand preference and brand extension fit; brand property affected consumers’ preference of extended products by the factor of cognition.  Moreover, different educational level of consumers had significant influence on extended products.3.Consumer s’ behavior intention was affected by extended product preference. Consumers’ different income also had significant influence on behavior intention.The study suggested the hotel practitioners provide creative and diverse products. Moreover, enhance the product elasticity and the convenience of consuming way. Service quality is also the important factor.  Hotels should provide professional training to its employees in order to enhance consumers’ preference.
