國際紡織成衣業新星經營策略與績效分析—以ZARA、TOMMY、ESPRIT為例
Strategies and Performance Analysis of Emerging Stars in Global Textile and Apparel Industry— Zara, Tommy and Esprit as Examples
品牌經營策略、品牌績效分析、企業分析、評價
我國加入WTO之後，隨著關稅的降低與保護措施的撤除，傳統紡織成衣業者首當其衝。紡織業有高科技化奈米材料、功能性複合纖維之智慧型織物等，下游成衣業卻為何如此快速流失。本研究探討國際紡織成衣業新星的經營策略，以堀起歐洲的ZARA、美國的TOMMY、ESPRIT為標竿學習對象，供有意自創品牌之業者參考。經由文獻探討品牌的定義、品牌經營策略、以及品牌績效分析，並以企業分析與評價為理論基礎，建立研究流程。在當今生產流程以全球通路佈局為導向的狀況下，Inditex以八個品牌、Tommy Hilfiger以四個品牌、ESPRIT以十二個產品線和紅地球（Red Earth）品牌經營。品牌績效分析將績效構面分成股東權益報酬率、淨營運利潤、營運資產週轉率、營運資產報酬率、淨舉債權益比率、營運財務槓桿、策略權益比率及策略權益報酬率等。集團企業財務報表分析與評價以策略分析為出發點，探討如何將珍貴的股東權益分配或佈局在控制資源、影響資源、未來資源與財務資源四大用途上。其次經由會計分析，利用財務報告中的附註及其他資訊，盡可能將會計扭曲回復為經濟實質，方能使後續分析得到較高的信賴度。而財務分析則是在公司暨定的目標與策略下評估公司的經營績效，主要是以比率分析檢視財務報表中不同項目間的關係。分析模式以集團企業為標的，將核心事業之營運實況分離出，並將損益表內之各分途資源的報酬率彙總製成圖表以利比較。我國企業在這國際化、全球化的時代可考慮從Original Equipment Manufacturing（OEM）轉型為Own Brand Marketing (OBM）的生產模式，以品牌策略提高整體的產品形象、設計能力以及行銷競爭力，促使我國產品能創造更高的附加價值。紡織業可經由電子化，以少量多樣的產銷體系，配合創新流行、好品質、低成本、及短交期的快速反應、並容入我國文化特色，積極拓展通路以因應市場需求。
After Taiwan joined the World Trade Organization, the accompanying reduction in tariffs and the removal of various protective measures greatly altered the way domestic textile and apparel firms operate. Even with the introduction of high-tech ingredients such as nano fiber materials and intelligent fabric made of complex fiber, the textile and apparel industry is still on a migrating trend and gradually moves its manufacturing base overseas. This thesis stuies the business strategies of emerging stars in the global textile and apparel industry such as ZARA in Europe and TOMMY and ESPRIT in U.S. with an aim to find some important benchmarks to inspire those who wish to build their own brand names.Based on the definition of brand and literature review on brand strategies, this thsis applies a business analysis and valuation methodology for brand performance analysis. Nowadays supply is simply driven by the global logistic demands, which in turn largely depends on brand recognition. Inditex (ZARA) operates with eight brands, while Tommy Hifiger has four brands and ESPRIT has 12 product lines plus the “Red Earth” brand. Our brand performance analysis uses returns on equity, net operating profits after tax, operating assets turnover, returns on operating assets, operating net debt equity ratio, operating financial leverage, strategic equity investment ratio, and returns on strategic equity investments as major performance indicators.Business analysis and valuation of conglomerates starts from strategy analysis which investigates how the group’s precious equity is allocated to four major usages controlling resources, influencing resources, future resources and financial resource. The next step is accounting analysis which utilizes information contained in footnotes of financial reports and other souces to undo accountant distortions such that latter analyses can be based on more reliable information which reflects the economic reality of the group. The final step is financial analysis which evaluates management performance in terms of the group’s goals and strategies. This stage utilizes primarily ratio analysis which attempts to discern any persistent relationship among financial items. Since the object of analysis is a conglomerate, the ability to isolate the performance of core business from other resource usages is crucial for comparison among conglomerates.In this era of globalization, companies in Taiwan may need to make the transition from Original Equipmentment Manufacturing (OEM) to Own Brand Marketing (OBM) in order to create greater values for their products and services. OBM calls for an indepth analysis of proper brand strategies to enhance product image, design ability and market competitiveness. Through the implementation of ERP and flexible manufacturing systems as well as the newly established cooperate culture of innovation, quality, low cost and just in time, and perhaps by incorporating some unique domestic characteristics, the industry may be able to expand its logistics in response to market demands.
