在4傳空時碼MC-CDMA系統下盲目通道估測和多使用者偵測技術
Blind Channel Estimation and Receiver Design for MC-CDMA MIMO Systems with 4-Tx Space-Time Block Codes
空時碼、多載波分碼多工存取、子空間通道估測、特徵空間接收機
MC-CDMA技術最早在1993年被提出來，它是結合OFDM及CDMA的一種多工存取方法，由於可以提供寬頻多媒體的通訊服務，因此被視為未來第四代行動通訊的可能標準技術。四傳多收的空時碼系統最近被廣泛討論；在瑞利衰減通道下，四傳多收系統可以有效增加空間及時域的分集增益，並進而減少錯誤率，例如Tarokh等提出full-diversity half-rate複數高階空時碼，Jafarkhani提出在最大允許正交特性下增加碼率提出full-rate half-diversity的四傳空時碼編碼技術，Tirkkonen等人提出設計滿足full-rate以及提供partial-diversity四傳空時碼編碼技術。我們首先整合上述的四傳空時碼系統，並建立適用於上述的四傳多收空時碼MC-CDMA系統的訊號模型。接著我們發展其通道估測，利用整理好的訊號模型，我們擬用子空間盲目通道估測技術來估測通道，其原理乃利用等效通道向量正交於接收訊號的雜訊子空間的特性，即可形成一齊次方程式，並利用最小平方法(least square)來計算出在有雜訊誤差下的最佳解。一般雜訊子空間可以由接收訊號的資料矩陣執行奇異值分解(SVD)或由接收訊號的自相關矩陣執行特徵值分解(EVD)求得。我們擬分析在有限取樣資料下，利用SVD或EVD計算的非理想的雜訊子空間對通道估測誤差之均方值(MSE)。其次我們設計多使用者接收器，我們擬用Capon接收機及特徵空間接收機並討論兩者效能的優勢。最後我們擬針對上述的接收機提出改良的方法。傳統中，由於使用空時碼技術，接收端需設計四組接收器分別估測4IMO空時碼的四個訊符，我們擬討論此四組估測器的關係以簡化系統。其次我們利用forward-backward平均法，提出增加取樣資料的有效方法，以提高系統的效能。
Recently, the space-time coded multi-carrier code-division multiple-access (ST-coded MC-CDMA) has been widely investigated for the great demand on capacities and transmission rates in the future wireless communication systems. In this chapter, we study the blind channel estimation and multiuser detection for quasi-synchronous multi-carrier code-division multiple-access (MC-CDMA) multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system with 4-Tx space-time block codes (STBC). The subspace-based channel estimation has been successfully for different CDMA systems. Here we present a subspace-based channel estimator which utilizes the space-time coding property to improve the performance of channel estimator. By either singular value decomposition (SVD) on the data matrix or eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) on the correlation matrix, the noise subspace can be obtained. Then the channel impulse response is estimated by the quadratic optimization problem. We investigate the performance analysis using the first order perturbation theory on the EVD of correlation matrix is derived. After obtaining the channel impulse response, the multiuser detection is developed afterwards. We adopt the eigenspace technique and the forward-backward techniques to reduce the performance degradation due to finite samples and/or vector errors. In order to get faster convergence rate, the weight vectors of these four filters are shown to be related each other, and then only about quarter of the computational complexity of eigenspace filter can be reduced.
