在uClinux上設計Time-Triggered&Event-Triggered快速熱感式列印系統
Time-Triggered and Event-Triggered Implementation of a High Speed Thermal Printing System on uClinux
uClinux、時間觸發、事件觸發
在現今的電器及日常生活用品中，嵌入一個作業系統已不再是遙不可及的夢想。由於cpu製程的進步、記憶體、flash價格日漸便宜，把作業系統放置在小型可攜式電器用品上並對其功能做特別的設定已是現在的潮流。在常用的作業系統中，大多數是為了執行不同任務而有公平的排程方法，無法使任一特殊的任務有最高優先權，讓系統能對特殊任務做最快速的處理。在此篇論文中利用uClinux為論文平台中的作業系統，利用其open source的便利性，對uClinux kernel的中斷作修改，並對指定的任務作最高優先順序處理，再搭配硬體的功能，來量測模擬得到熱感式印表機列印時會觸發的中斷，藉此軟體與硬體的配合達到快速即時列印。不單是如此，同時可用uClinux強大的擴充性，將欲列印的資料透過網路應用程式方式丟至本論文平台上，由uClinux上的Server程式接收並列印，省去舊有列印方式必須要透過PC端使用RS-232或Parallel Port或USB Device連結至印表機列印的不便性。同時此平台可取代PC電腦來做Printer Server使用，利用網路有線或無線或紅外線傳輸資料，提升印表機之潛力。
The originally design purpose of uClinux operating system focused on the fair of scheduling of process. But uClinux can not meet the requirement of Real-Time printing.Therefore, we will modify the uClinux kernel to make the uClinux have the capability of Real-Time processing, especially for printing process.In this project, we will provide a mixed time- and event-triggered approach to implement a printing architecture with double buffer function. When controlling the printer to print in high speed, the triggered frequency of the whole system is high enough to reach at least 2000 Hz if the printing speed reaches 10 inches per second (IPS), meaning that lots of tasks must be finished in 0.5ms precisely and promptly. Since controlling the thermal printhead (TPH) is a periodic task, we choose the time-triggered architecture (TTA) to be the main architecture. This is because the TTA generates such a framework for the domain of large distributed embedded real-time systems in high-dependability environments. The same ideas are used to address the fundamental issues of real-time programming for printing control system. However, purely time-triggered approaches do not handle irregularly spaced new events well and require tasks to be periodic. In order to let the system operation to be more flexible, we use the event-triggered architecture, which tackle some problems of the TTA.
