在控制市場風險及信用風險下的價值投資決策
Value investment strategy under controlling market and credit risks
景氣循環、市場風險、信用風險、P/E比、P/B比、景氣對策信號綜合判斷分數、投資決策

目前有許多有關股價的研究，每一種方式皆因方法的不同而有不同的評價效果。本研究主要是探討在產業景氣循環位於低迷期及透過一定程度的信用風險控管下，找出價格被低估的股票，以作為投資人尋求報酬率更高的選擇。個人投資者並不像法人投資機構有較完整的資訊、團隊與分析報告，所以本研究的動機是希望利用公開且方便取得的資訊在不使用複雜的運算、模型的狀況下，運用較簡單的方法供個人投資者做為投資決策。本研究在實證上以行政院經建會所編製的景氣對策信號綜合判斷分數在景氣衰退時做為景氣位於谷底的判斷，另透過台灣經濟新報評等、董監事持股比率、董監事質押比率、負債比率來篩選信用風險較低的個股，並以P/E比、P/B比挑選出低價股，於景氣對策信號分數翻轉為景氣穩定、景氣微熱及景氣過熱來賣出持股。實證的結果顯示，本研究的投資模擬策略算是相當成功。單就結果而言，在景氣對策信號綜合判斷分數落於景氣衰退時進場，在景氣對策信號綜合判斷分數落於景氣穩定、景氣微熱及景氣過熱來賣出持股，其獲利家數及報酬率的機率均相當高，如以總平均年化報酬率來作為投資組合來看，六次出場的實證結果達100%的獲利。然因本研究每次進場時機均隔相當長的時間，較不適合短線進出者的決策，但卻可供不喜好風險的投資者做為另一個選擇，即資金平時存放於無風險產品，遇景氣對策信號分數落在衰退時便可適時進場以獲取更高的報酬。此外，由於本研究投資模擬績效未計入股利，如將股利計入，其投資績效必會更高。
Presently, there are many researches related to stock price, and different research methods will result in different valuation effects. This research will investigate that under a recession of industrial cycle and utilize a certain of credit control, investors can discover underestimated stock thereby gain a higher return.Unlike professional investment institution, Individual investor unable to possess completed information and analytical report, as a result, the motivation of this research attempts to employ public information rather than complexity of model analyze or calculation to make investment decisions for individual investors.The research will fundamentally judge by “Monitoring Indicator” (issued by Council for Economic Planning and Development) where the indication in the recession phenomenon and through TCRI rating、Insider Holding ratio and liability ratio to sieve out lower risky credit stocks, simultaneously selecting cheaper stocks by P E and P B ratio. Investors sell the stock while Monitoring Indicator turn to stable or over boom.The result testifies that the investigation of the investment simulate strategy is confirmed. Buy stocks when Monitoring Indicator is steady and sell stocks when Monitoring Indicator is over booming. This portfolio is considered as average return annually, the result of the return was 100% from 6 times transaction.Nevertheless, this research is focused on the long-term transactions, instead of short-term decision-making. This would provide another option for risk-aversions to arrange their asset in the risk-free product generally and gain benefit from the Monitoring Indicator down or booming business cycle. Furthermore, this simulation have not included dividends, consequently, the investment return should be underestimation.
