基因轉殖菊花表現大麥HVA1基因以增強對鹽逆境之耐受性
Expression of the barley HVA1 gene in transgenic chrysanthemum confers increased tolerance to salt stress
菊花、HVA1基因、LEA蛋白質、鹽逆境、農桿菌轉殖、Real-time PCR
分離自以離素(abscisic acid, ABA)處理的大麥（Hordeum vulgare L.）粉糊層(aleurone layer)的HVA1蛋白，屬於第三類的LEA(Late Embryogenesis Abundant)蛋白質，大小約為22kDa。研究發現，自土壤吸水三天的植物幼苗，在離素、乾旱、冷害、鹽害及高溫等逆境處裡下，能夠迅速的表現出HVA1蛋白質。水稻為最早利用HVA1轉殖的植物，HVA1基因轉殖水稻發現較能適應高鹽的逆境。到目前為止，已有許多HVA1基因轉殖作物被發表，例如：菸草(tobacco)、蕃茄(tomato)、小麥(wheat)及燕麥(oat)等，多為糧食作物或模式，尚無HVA1轉殖花卉的問世。因此本實驗利用農桿菌轉殖菊花，得到HVA1基因轉殖菊花，並比較轉殖株與栽培種菊花在鹽逆境下之抗氧化基因表現與生理型態之差異。經農桿菌轉殖後，獲得多株再生成功的菊花幼苗，選取具有抗生素抗性之擬轉殖菊花，經過PCR檢測確認獲得數個轉殖株。將切離葉片以鹽逆境處理，經RT real-time PCR結果顯示，以轉殖株400mM NaCl處理十分鐘後，catalase基因即被誘導表現。而且catalase基因不但有週期性表現之現象，而且表現量逐漸增加。比較鹽逆境處理前後catalase基因的表現量，發現栽培種菊花之catalase基因表現量下降98%，而轉殖株之catalase基因表現量，最低下降92%，最高則上升至214%。在catalase活性表現方面，轉殖株的catalase活性增加量均比栽培種高，栽培種之catalase活性增加量僅0.29，轉殖株的catalase活性增加量在1.63至4.31之間。由此得知，我們所獲得之HVA1基因轉殖菊花在鹽逆境下，其catalase基因的表現程度較野生株強，具較佳之抗氧化活性。
The barley HVA1 is belong to group 3 LEA (late embryogenesis abundant ) protein and its molecular weight is about 22kDa. The HVA1 protein was firstly isolated from the aleurone layer of the barley seed. HVA1 mRNA was rapidly induced in young seedlings (3 days after imbibition) by ABA treatment and a series of stress conditions, such as drought, cold, NaCl, and heat. The HVA1 transgenic rice harboring HVA1 gene was found to be more tolerant to the salt stress than wild-type. In order to increase the salt tolerance of chrysanthemum, we try to produce transgenic chrysanthemum by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. After Agrobacterium transformation, we have obtained a lot of chrysanthemum seedlings. By putting detached leaf of chrysanthemum seedling in a selection medium, we acquired several chrysanthemum plants which may contain HVA1 gene. These putative transgenic plants were confirmed by PCR analysis. By the analysis of RT real-time PCR, the expression of catalase gene of transgenic plant was found to induce when the detached leaf put in salt stress for 10 min. Morever, we find that catalase gene is regulated by a circadian rhythm, and the expression of catalase increases with every rhythm cycle. Compared with the extent of catalase expression before and after salt stress treatment, the catalase of wild-type reduces 98%, while transgenic plants are from -92% to 214%. Detecting the catalase activity of detached leaf treated with salt stress or water, we find that the increase of catalase activity in transgenic plant is higher than that in wild-type plant. The catalase cativity only increase 0.29 in wild-type, however, the catalase cativity increase from 1.63 to 4.31 in transgenic plants. We conclude that the transgenic chrysanthemum plants containing HVA1 have higher antioxidant ability under salt stress.
