墨子與耶穌之愛的比較
A Comparative Study of Love of Mo Tzu and Jesus
墨子、墨子十論、耶穌、四部福音、愛
在多變而動盪的時代流動下，「愛」這個話題卻永不退流行。然而，「愛」到底是什麼呢？筆者認為愛是人類的天性，並且，愛在人類歷史長河裡扮演著最重要的角色，愛在生命的過程中肯定了它自身的完整性。不過，今日的人們開始對愛抱持著疑惑與不安，並且社會上亦出現了一些破裂和暴力的愛。那麼，對「愛」的探討與實踐，是筆者內在深處的聲音，亦是撰述本文的動機。因此，身為現代人、中國人以及基督徒的筆者，渴望從中國文化與基督信仰的會晤之中，探求愛的真諦與價值，為現今的人們與社會，重拾起那份對「愛」的真摯，進而思索基督信仰的中國化、中國文化的基督化的發展可能。本文採用文獻分析法、歷史研究法、範疇整理法、詮釋研究法、對話辯證法、比較分析法等方法來進行研究，一共分為五章：第一章　墨子與耶穌的時代背景及其思想源流，是採用文獻分析法與歷史研究法來切入，為顯出墨子與耶穌之愛的歷史背景與事件意義。第二章　從《墨子》與《新約》合論墨子與耶穌的愛，是採用文獻分析法與範疇整理法來研究，為在墨子與耶穌的整體思想中呈現出兩人愛的藍圖，並以「墨子十論」與「四部福音」為主來論述墨子與耶穌的愛。第三章　墨子與耶穌之愛的分析是採用文獻分析法、詮釋研究法來剖析墨子與耶穌的愛，主旨在透過兩人對愛的內涵與實踐來進行解釋、理解和批判，又以對話辯證法來研究互為主體來進行對話性的辯證，期盼從對話的主題上取得一致的平台，以作出自身的判斷－或是贊同，或是反對，因而通過他者更能認識、理解自己的主張。第四章　墨子與耶穌之愛的比較是採用比較分析法來研究，並以通觀、局部、襯托、批評和融滙比較，這五種方法來省思兩者之愛的異同，因此見到兩者那麼的相似且彼此相互呼應，不過兩者很大的相異之處，乃是二者具有不對等的距離：墨子是人，而耶穌基督則是人亦是神。第五章  墨子與耶穌之愛的時代意義是採用文獻分析法與歷史研究法來研究，並從兩者之愛對今日的貢獻與和平的啟發來做探討。肯定墨子之愛持續在中國文化之中，並以加惠天下人的大愛，符應了全球倫理的宣言，而耶穌之愛則是實踐在追隨祂的基督徒的生命之中，特別是對生命的服務。墨子認為愛利人利己，能創造雙贏的局面，使世界和平有了可能，而耶穌則是以寬恕、釋放和治癒的愛情，開啟了世界和平的希望。最後，本研究肯定墨子與耶穌為我們每一個人活出一條愛的道路，這條道路是真摰且是可能的，因為人與人之間具有可感性、互通性。並且讓我們認出愛具有整體、全部、仁義 、涵利的特質，愛超越時空，沒有界限，亦不需任何條件或是目的，因為愛的本質就是可愛的、美好的。所以，墨子放眼天下，耶穌成全生命，前者是充斥了兼愛的真摯，後者實踐了愛的真實與永恆，為我們帶出愛的價值與希望－永恆的可能、 大愛的可行，答覆了唯有愛能使生命緊緊結合的事實。
In turbulent days, the seemingly ancient topic “love” is always the new one. What is love? Love is the deep-rooted nature of human persons. Love has played a significant role and manifested its integrity in the process of life during human history. Nowadays, however, people begin to feel dubious and disquieted about love because love becomes to be so twisted that it results in disharmony and violence. Therefore, in order to respond today’s challenges, the researcher followed the inner voice to write this thesis researching the essence and practice of love. As a member of this generation, a Chinese and a Christian, the researcher wishes to rediscover the true meaning and value of love out of the encounter between Chinese culture and Christian faith, and to help the contemporaries to recover the confidence in love. Furthermore, the researcher also discusses in this thesis the possibility of the inculturation of Christianity and the Christianization of Chinese culture.    The methods applied in this thesis are as follows documental analysis, historical research, categorical establishment, hermeneutics, dialectic dialogue, and comparative analysis. There are five chapters    In chapter one, the researcher adopts the methods of documental analysis and historical research to study the background of Mo Tzu and Jesus, as well as the source of their thought. Throughout such study, we could discover the historical background and meaning of Mo Tzu and Jesus’ thought.    In chapter two, using Mo Tzu and the New Testament, the researcher adopts the methods of documental analysis and categorical establishment to study love in the context of Mo Tzu and Jesus’ whole thought. And then we narrow our horizon to Ten Theses of Mo Tzu and the Four Gospels to further study their vision about love.    In chapter three, the researcher adopts the methods of documental analysis and hermeneutics to analyse, to interpret, to understand and to criticize the meaning and the practice of love of Mo Tzu and Jesus. The researcher also adopts the method of dialectic dialogue to further understand one’s assertion through another’s eyes based on the intersubjectivity.    In chapter four, the researcher adopts the method of comparative analysis to speculate about love the common or different viewpoints of Mo Tzu and Jesus. Although they have some similar opinions, they are quite different in some aspects. Some of their outlooks on love have ontological differences because one is pure human while the other is both human and God.    In chapter five, the researcher adopts the methods of documental analysis and historical research to show, based on the two positions, the meaning of love, and to investigate their contribution to and the enlightenment for this generation. Mo Tzu’s assertion about love has continuously influenced Chinese culture and it corresponds to the global ethics. However, Jesus’ teaching about love affects the whole life of  Christians and their service for life. Mo Tzu argued that love benefits both the one who loves and the one who is loved, and love makes world peace possible. Jesus, however, builds up the hope of world peace by his forgiving, freeing and healing love.    Finally, the researcher confirms that both Mo Tzu and Jesus showed us the way of love. This way is authentic and possible because human beings share the common human nature. Love’s attributes are integrity, benevolence and righteousness. Love always benefits both parties and transcends time and space. Love needs no conditions or purposes and has no boundary. The essence of love is charity and charm. Mo Tzu concerned the whole world with wholehearted love while Jesus fulfills human life with the practice of love and reveals the value, the feasibility and the eternity of love. Only love can unite all peoples.
