多目標流程式排程有效解之研究
a study of multu-objective flow shop scheduling problems
多目標排程、流程式、模擬退火法、蟻群演算法
無論在實務應用或理論探討上，多目標排程問題一直受到管理決策者與學者的重視，然而問題本質上多為NP-hard，一般用來解決此類問題的方法有兩種，一為可以取得最佳解，但時效性較差的正確解法；另一為啟發式解法。在分秒必爭的激烈的環境中，花很長時間去等待一個最佳解的出現，並不符合企業管理原則。相對的，啟發式解法雖然不能保證得到最佳解，但卻可以迅速的取得近似最佳解，實務上，具備時效性的近似最佳解，對管理者言，可能比最佳解更有意義。近年來，已經發展出一些共通式啟發解法，如塔布搜尋法(TA，tabu search)、模擬退火法(SA，simulated annealing) 、類神經網路(neural network)、基因演算法(GA，genetic algorithms)、蟻群最佳化(ACO，ant colony optimization)等，可以用來求解複雜度較高的排程問題。本文整合了蟻群演算法及模擬退火法建構一個求解多目標排程問題的共通式演算法。此整合演算法可以用來求解流程式排程之近似有效解集合。透過切合實際環境排程問題的設計，整合利用模擬退火法較佳的全域搜尋能力，以及深入搜尋能力較佳的蟻群演算法，可以迅速取得近似最佳解，提供管理者用來解決多目標流程式排程問題。資料測試結果顯示本文所建構之整合演算法比現有之模擬退火法具有更好的求解效果，當機器數超過10個以上，在10種雙準則的多目標問題中，具有80% 以上的勝率。
Managers and scholars have paid much attention to multi-objective scheduling problems in either realistic applications or theoretical studying. However they are almost part of NP-hard problems. In general, there are two ways to cope with these problems. One is Exact Solution which could get optimum solutions but has bad efficiency; the other one is meta-heuristic solution. In competitive environment, in order to seize every time and second, businesses are not willing to spend much time to get exact solution, it does not conform to business management principles. Instead of exact solution, meta-heuristic solution dose not guarantee to find exact solution, but it could get approximate solution very quickly. In reality, approximate solution with efficiency might be meaningful for managers.Recently, some meta-heuristic solutions, such as Tabu Search, Simulated Annealing, Neural Network, Genetic Algorithms, and Ant Colony Optimization and so on, have been developed to deal with high complexity scheduling problems.In this research, we integrate ant colony optimization and stimulated annealing to construct a meta-heuristic solution to solve multi-objective scheduling problems. The method could be used to get complete efficient solution set of flow shop scheduling.We could offer approximate solution very quickly by designing for realistic environmental scheduling problems, integrating the ability of simulated annealing to search global solution and the ability of ant colony optimization to search deeply to managers to cope with multi-objective scheduling problems. The results of data test display that the effect of our integrated algorithm is better than traditional simulated annealing. When test over ten machines, we could get more than 80% wins in ten kinds of multi-objective problems.
