大學校院甲組桌球選手知覺教練領導行為、團隊凝聚力與成績表現之研究
The Study of Universities’ Division A of Table Tennis Athletes’ Perception of Coach Leadership Behavior, Team Cohesion and Performance
甲組桌球選手、教練領導行為、團隊凝聚力、成績表現
本研究主要目的在瞭解大學校院甲組桌球選手知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力之間的關係，及其與各團體不同成績表現的差異性。本研究對象以參加95年全國大專運動會團體桌球賽甲組選手，共239位。共發出問卷239份，回收有效問卷共229份，有效樣本率為95.81%。並將所得資料經描述性統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析、雪費法事後比較及皮爾森積差相關分析，結果發現：一、知覺的教練領導行為（一）性別方面，女選手在「訓練與指導」的知覺程度高於男選手；男選手在「協議行　　  為」的知覺程度高於女選手。（二）選手層級方面，國家級選手在「訓練與指導」、「獎勵行為」上，知覺程度高於全　　　運會與大運會選手；全運會選手在「訓練與指導」、「獎勵行為」與「關懷行為」　　　的知覺程度，又高於大運會選手。二、團隊凝聚力（一）性別方面，且男選手在「人際親和」的得分上顯著高於女選手。（二）訓練年數方面，參與訓練年數「10-12年」的選手，在團隊凝聚力「團隊適應」得分　　　上顯著高於「13-15年」的選手。（三）有無下場比賽方面，在「人際親和」構面上「有」下場比賽的選手在得分上，高於　　　「無」下場比賽的選手。三、知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力相關分析　　教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力在各構面上皆達顯著的相關，其中以教練領導行為的「訓練與指導」、「獎勵行為」與團隊凝聚力的「人際吸引」之相關最高。四、成績表現　　不同成績表現的桌球選手在教練領導行為之「訓練與指導」、「關懷行為」構面上達顯著水準；「優勝球隊」的得分顯著高於「次優球隊」的得分。基於以上研究結果，本研究提出以下具體建議，以供國內桌球教練組訓及未來進一步研究之參考。一、對大學校院運動代表隊教練之建議　　為增進選手與教練之間的良性互動、提昇選手對於團隊的向心力，爾後，身為大學校院運動代表隊的教練除了給予選手「訓練與指導行為」技能之外，宜在加強有關心理上與精神層面上的心靈管理。二、對後續研究者之建議　　未來研究者可擴及至高中、國中選手及各層級運動代表隊，進行多方探究，應能獲得更多的研究發現。
The purpose of the research was to examine the perceived coach leadership behaviors and team cohesion of Division A of Table Tennis Athletes in Taiwan’s universities and colleges, and in order to find the different performances between each team. The study subject was Division A of 239 table tennis athletes from universities and colleges who attending The 2006 National University Sport Game. A total of 239 copies were dispatched, 229 of the questionnaires were effective, 95.81% of the returned questionnaires were valid. Descriptive statistics, t-test, one-way ANOVA, Scheffe’s method and Pearson Correlations were used to analyze the collected data. The important results and findings can be summarized as follows1.Perception of coach leadership behaviors(1) Gender Female players were much more aware of ‘Training and 　Instruction’ by coaches than male players; male players were much more aware of ‘Negotiating Behavior’ by coaches than female players.(2)Players’ Level National level players perceived much more ‘Training and Instruction’ and ‘Encouraging Behavior’ by coaches than the level of National Sport Game and University Sport Game. Especially, players of National Sport Game perceived ‘Training and Instruction’, ‘Encouraging Behavior’, and ‘Concerning Behavior’ higher than players of University Sport Game.2.Team cohesion(1)Gender Male players’ performance on ‘Interpersonal 　Congeniality’ was better than female players.(2)Training time Players who were trained up to ’10-12 years’ get higher scores on ‘Team Adaptation’ than those players who were trained ’13-15 years’.(3)Take part in a competition The performances of players who take part in a competition practically had better ‘Interpersonal Congeniality’ than bench players (without entering the competition).3.Correlations between the coach leadership behavior and team cohesionThere were significant differences in each dimension between coach leadership behavior and team cohesion. Among them, ‘Training and Instruction’ and ‘Encouraging Behavior’ of coach leadership behavior had the most significant correlation with ‘Interpersonal Attraction’ of team cohesion.4.PerformanceThe players with different performances had significant differences in ‘Training and Instruction’ and ‘Concerning Behavior’; the winning teams have higher scores than subordinate teams.According to the findings as above, the study provides some specific suggestions for national table tennis coach’ training and further studies as reference.1.The suggestion for coach of representative in Taiwan’s universities and collegesTo promote the positive interaction between players and coaches and to lift the centripetal force, except that the coaches give the skill of ‘Training and Instruction’ to players, it is better for strengthening the management of mental and spirit.2.The suggestion for further researchersThe researchers in the future could broaden to study the representative of senior high school, high school, and each level sport representative; there are more findings that would be found.
