大學體育室服務品質滿意度之研究以萬能科技大學為例
An Analysis of the Satisfaction of Athletic Department Service Quality at Vanung University
大學體育室、服務品質、滿意度
摘 要本研究的主要目的在於探討萬能科技大學學生對體育室服務品質之滿意現況，及其學生運動參與行為之關係。採用問卷調查研究法，首先經文獻探討相關理論及過去的一些實證研究，並據以發展「體育室服務品質滿意度調查問卷」，以進行調查分析後，獲致以下之結論：一、萬能科技大學學生每週運動一次(含以下)者76％；沒有參加運動社團佔92％；加入運動代表隊的學生佔3％；參與校外運動組織所舉辦的運動活動的學生佔百分之15；而學生從事最多的運動項目前三名依序是羽球、游泳及籃球。二、學生對於體育室整體服務品質滿意度的感受，係持正面且肯定的評價；而在體育室服務品質四個構面中最讓學生滿意的是的「體育教學」。三、男女學生對於體育室服務品質滿意度之比較上均無顯著差異；而低年級學生較高年級學生對體育室服務品質滿意度高；而進修部學生認為體育室服務品質滿意度在體育教學構面較滿意。四、運動次數越高的學生對體育室服務品質滿意度高於運動次數較少的學生；有參與體育性社團之學生對行政支援構面、體育活動構面的滿意度較無參與體育性社團之學生高；加入校隊之學生雖較少數，但可以看出他們有較多接觸體育室的機會，所以包括接受行政支援及整體服務品質滿意度均較其他學生高；而有參與校外體育活動之學生對體育室服務品質滿意度較無參與校外體育活動之學生高。
AbstractThe purpose of the study was to analyze the quality and satisfaction of athletic department service at Vanung University and its relationship with the students sports participation behavior.  An “athletic department service quality and satisfaction questionnaire” was developed for the study.  A total of 1275 students (592 males and 683 females) participated in the study.  This subject number accounts for 18.25% of total student enrollment at the university.  Descriptive statistics and analysis of variance were used for the analysis of the data.  Within the limitations and delimitations of the study, the following conclusions were made1.  Besides the regular physical education classes offered by the university, 76% of the students exercised only once a week or less.  Fifteen percent of the students participated sports activities offered by off-campus organizations.  The most popular sports events among students were badminton, swimming and basketball.2.  The overall rating of the students toward the service quality of the athletic department was positive.  Among the four evaluation factors, the class teaching aspect received the highest mark.3.  There was no significant difference between male and female students toward the satisfaction on service quality.  The lower classes (freshmen and sophomore) rated significantly higher than the upper classes on service quality.  The students in continuing education division also gave class teaching aspect the highest remark.4.  The more frequent sports activity students participated, the higher they gave the rating on the overall service quality satisfaction compared to those with less frequent sports participation students.  Students participated in intramural sports clubs experienced higher satisfaction on administrative support and organized sports activities aspects of the evaluation than those without the experience of intramural sports club participations.  Only a few students participated in varsity sport teams; however, these students had more direct means to interact with the athletic department, therefore, gave higher rating on administrative supports and overall service quality than those non varsity students.  Those who participated off-campus organized sports activities also ranked higher on the overall service quality than those who did not participated off-campus sports activities.
