大學生運動參與與性別角色關係之研究-以輔仁大學為例
A Study of Relationship between the Gender Role and College Students' Participation in Sports -- A Case Study of Fu Jen Catholic University
性別角色、運動涉入、性別刻板化
大學生運動參與與性別角色關係之研究-以輔仁大學學生為例輔仁大學體育學系碩士班研究生：張雅惠  指導教授：楊志顯 博士摘　　要本研究旨在探討運動員與一般大學生對兩性角色的認知及其對兩性參與運動的認知和看法，從人口統計變項來檢視受試者之性別角色刻板印象程度及運動性別適配性，並探討受試者本身參與的項目與其性別在高度適配、中度適配或低度適配時，在性別角色認知及運動之性別適配性的認知上之差異；另外，運動從事理想性別屬性的符合程度對於性別角色認知及運動之性別適配性上有無顯著差異，將加以分析。研究者以「大學生運動參與情形與性別角色認知關係問卷」作為資料收集的工具。並分別以普查及隨機抽樣的方式，對體育系及一般大學生進行問卷調查，共發出問卷1030份，回收有效問卷832份。根據所得資料以描述性統計、獨立樣本t 檢定、單因子變異數分析及皮爾森積差相關等統計方法進行分析。研究結論如下：一、  本次研究調查對象男性有444 人，女性有388人；於運動涉入程度方面，甲組代表隊有240人，乙組代表隊15人，體育社團118人，一般大學生459人。在整體受試者對性別角色的刻板印象化於「人格特質」及「職業」兩層面高於平均數。於對運動從事理想性別的刻板印象化層面，大學生性別角色刻板印象分配狀態為右偏態。二、  男女受試者在性別角色刻板印象化的程度上在「性別角色刻板印象」、「人格特質」、「家庭事務」、「活動或遊戲」及「職業」等構面均達顯著水準且皆為男性得分高於女生。而不同運動涉入程度受試者在性別角色刻板印象化的程度上在「性別角色刻板化印象」、「人格特質」、「家庭事務」、「活動或遊戲」及「職業」等構面均達顯著水準「性別角色刻板化印象」構面上高涉入程度顯著高於中涉入程度及低涉入程度；「人格特質」構面上高涉入程度顯著高於中涉入程度及低涉入程度；「家庭事務」構面上高涉入程度顯著高於低涉入程度；「活動或遊戲」構面上高涉入程度顯著高於中涉入程度及低涉入程度；「職業」構面上高涉入程度顯著高於低涉入程度。三、  男女受試者於運動從事理想性別的刻板印象化程度上達顯著水準，其中男性較女性得分高。不同運動涉入程度受試者在運動從事理想性別的刻板印象化程度上未達顯著水準。男女受試者運動參與之適配性達顯著水準，且男受試者顯著高於女受試者。四、  不同運動涉入程度受試者運動參與之性別適配性達顯著水準，其中高涉入受試者顯著高於中涉入受試者。於運動參與之性別適配性與運動從事理想性別的刻板印象化程度有顯著相關。關鍵詞：性別角色、運動涉入、性別刻板化
A Study of the Relationship between the Gender Role and College Students’ Participation in Sports-- A Case Study of Fu Jen Catholic UniversityGraduate Institute of Physical Education, Fu Jen Catholic UniversityResearcher  Chang, Ya-Hui           Advisor Dr. Yang, Chih-HsienAbstract   This research was for the purpose of discussing the cognition and the view on the gender role and the participation in sports of the athlete and the common college students. From population statistics variables, we can inquire into the degree of gender role stereotype and the gender fit in sports towards test-receivers. The test-receivers’ cognition of the gender role and the gender fit in sports differs when they participated in different items which were high, moderate or low suitably for their gender. Besides, we also analyzed whether there was obvious difference between the gender cognition and the gender fit in sports when test-receivers conformed themselves to an ideal gender attribute. This researcher used the questionnaires of “the relationship between the gender role and college students’ participation in sports” to collect the data. Students in physical education department and the common college were both chose as the research samples to fill out the questionnaires by the way of random sampling. Concern with this survey, we sent 1030 questionnaires and received 832 ones back. After analyzing by descriptive statistic, t-test, one-way ANOVA, and Pearson product-moment correlation, we got the following resultsFirst, the object of this study contains 444 male people and 388 female people. In the aspect of the sports involvement degree, there are 240 people in the group A and 15 in the group B. There are also 118 people in the Athletics association and 459 people of general university students. The whole test-receiver's gender stereotype are higher than the average in two levels of the" personality characteristic" and" occupation" Moreover, in the level of an ideal gender stereotype in sports among college students, the state is in right-skewed distritution.Second, both male and female people get to the level of significance of the gender role stereotype degree in many aspects such as” gender role stereotype”,” personality characteristic”, ”family affairs”, ”activities or games” and” occupation”, etc. High involvement degree is obviously higher than both moderate and low in three aspects like ” gender role stereotype”, ” personality characteristic”, ”activities or games” and so on. In addition, high involvement degree is obviously higher than low in other two aspects.Third, both male and female people get to the level of significance of an ideal gender role stereotype degree in sports. Male people get the higher scores than female in this case. The test-receivers with different involvement degree don’t get to the level of significance in the ideal gender role stereotype degree in sports. We can find that both male and female people get to the level of significance of the gender fit in sports. Also, male people obviously get the higher standard than female.Fourth, the gender fit of the test-receivers with different involvement degree in sports get to the level of significance. The test-receivers with high involvement degree obviously get higher standard than those with low involvement degree do. Therefore, there is close relationship between the gender fit and the ideal gender role stereotype degree in sports.Keywords：Sex role, Sports involvement, Gender stereotype
