大陸地區金融風險之研究--兼述台資商業銀行登陸問題
A Study on the Financial Risk in the Maninland Area as well as on China-Bound Investment by Taiwanese Commercial Banks
金融改革、外資銀行、分析法、銀行業、服務業、備忘錄、可能性、台資銀行

摘要本文以台資商業銀行登陸投資之研究為題，應用個案分析法、歷史研究法及文獻分析法進行歸納分析，以外資銀行的觀點就跨國投資進行理論與實證之探討。從兩岸經貿往來日益密切切入，探討大陸處於經濟轉軌期之「銀行體系」現況及改革策略，並分析外資銀行在大陸之發展現況與營運策略，解讀其與台資銀行合作之可能性及相關市場競爭態勢，作為台灣銀行業者評估登陸模式之參考。大陸地區在歷經20多年的經濟改革後，初步已建立了「中國人民銀行為核心，國有商業銀行為主體，多種金融機構並存」的銀行體系。1994年起推動的金融改革，逐步將四大國有銀行由「國家專業銀行」蛻變成「國有獨資商業銀行」並順利推動中國建設銀行及中國銀行在香港上市。依據「中國大陸入會服務業承諾彙總表」，大陸將於2006年底前全面解除外資銀行地域及業務種類之限制，外資銀行為擴大在大陸的金融版圖，除持續擴充營業據點外，並積極以「戰略投資者」身分參股大陸地區銀行。台灣地區已允許銀行業辦理與大陸地區之直接通匯，範圍並涵蓋放款及應收帳款收買等授信業務，自2001年起並開放台灣地區銀行業赴大陸設立辦事處，惟因兩岸雙方「金融監理備忘錄」遲未簽訂，致台資銀行在大陸地區設立之辦事處仍無法升格為分行，而陸資銀行來台亦無進度。然兩岸金融活動往來需求殷切，就台資銀行全球化佈局觀察，大陸市場更是不可或缺的一環，面對大陸對金融市場管制要比其他產業更多、更為嚴格，且不完全的訊息揭露風險，台資銀行應可借重外資銀行發展經驗，規劃登陸策略。本研究之主要發現有三：一是未來台資銀行登陸條件將與外資銀行相同，而外資銀行在大陸發展之經驗與經營策略，可供台資銀行借鏡，若以戰略投資者入股大陸銀行，經評估以城市商業銀行最為恰當；二是大陸自1994年以來的金融改革試點已取得初步成效，但是對城市商業銀行及農業金融體系之深化改革則有待觀察；三是兩岸雙方就金融監理協議或取代金融監理協議之簽署模式似已逐漸取得共識，未來若能順利展開洽談，台資銀行登陸之機會可望逐步浮現。
AbstractThis paper studies the investments of Taiwanese commercial banks in mainland China, and uses case studies, historical research, and literature analysis to carry out inductive analysis. This paper then performs theoretical and empirical studies of cross-border investments from a foreign bank perspective. This paper takes into account the increasing frequency of cross-strait trade and explores the current state and reform strategies of the banking system in China in economic transition. The study analyzes the current developments and operational strategies of foreign banks in China to determine the possibility of cooperation between foreign banks and Taiwanese banks, as well as relevant market competition. This study can be used as a reference for evaluating the models by which Taiwanese banks can do business in China.After more than two decades of economic reform, mainland China has established a banking system where the People’s Bank of China is the core and state-owned commercial banks are the main entities, and where there is coexistence of different financial institutions. The financial reform in 1994 progressively transformed the four state-owned banks from national specialized banks into wholly state-funded commercial banks. The reform also led to the listing of China Construction Bank and Bank of China on the Hong Kong stock exchange. Based on China’s WTO accession commitments for its service industry, China will remove all restrictions on operation and form of establishment against foreign banks. To expand financial operations in China, foreign banks will, in addition to increasing the number of their business offices, actively seek to become strategic investors of local Chinese banks and become bank shareholders.Taiwan has already permitted its banks to engage in direct remittances to China. This also includes credit transactions such as loan offering and acquiring of accounts receivable. Since 2001, Taiwan has allowed its local banks to open offices in China, but since the cross-strait memorandum of understanding on financial supervision has yet to be signed, offices established by Taiwanese banks in China are not eligible for upgrade into branch offices; there is also no timetable for allowing mainland Chinese banks to establish operations in Taiwan. Nonetheless, as cross-strait financial activities and exchanges increase, the mainland Chinese market has become indispensable in the Taiwanese banks’ pursuit for global operations. Taking into account that mainland China has more restrictions in place for its financial market compared with other markets, that these restrictions are more stringent, and that there are risks from incomplete disclosure of information, Taiwanese banks should rely on the development experience of foreign banks to plan their strategies in entering the Chinese market.This study presents three findings. First, in the future, the conditions through which Taiwanese banks enter the Chinese market will be the same as those of foreign banks. Therefore, the experiences of foreign banks in the development of business operations and their business strategies in mainland China can serve as reference for Taiwanese banks. If Taiwanese banks were to become shareholders of local Chinese banks as strategic investors, the analysis presented in this paper shows that city commercial banks would be the most appropriate. Second, although mainland China has achieved preliminary results from its financial reform that began in 1994, further observations are necessary to determine whether reforms in the city commercial banks and agricultural finance system can be fully realized. Third, there seems to be a progressive consensus on the financial supervision agreement or the method of agreement in lieu of the financial supervision agreement between Taiwan and mainland China. If future negotiations can proceed smoothly, Taiwanese banks will have increased opportunities to enter the Chinese market.
