奈米金氣體感測材料之線性溶合能量關係模式與圖形辨識之研究
Linear Solvation Energy Relationship model and pattern recognition studies for gold nanoparticle vapor sensor array.
單層分子膜、奈米金簇、氣體感測、線性溶合能量關係模式
本研究利用兩相合成法分別以四種不同之硫醇(thiol)結構來包覆奈米金簇。經由穿透式電子顯微鏡(TEM)量測後得知，其粒徑分布約在2~6 nm之間。在MPC氣體感測特性方面，我們以石英微量天平(QCM)及微小指叉狀電極(micro-interdigit electrode)來研究；經實驗證實，MPC材料可藉由包覆之官能基來決定，以產生不同之選擇性。當MPC吸附氣體時，QCM呈現的訊號是受到質量改變所影響，我們可經由QCM量測並計算，以得知氣體吸附平衡常數，K(partition coefficient)，進而建立每一種MPC材料之線性溶合能量關係式(LSER model)。溶劑參數(solvation parameters)即代表MPC材料與氣體之間的化學作用，我們發現：偶極-偶極力(s)及氫鍵酸(a)對於MOP-Au材料有顯著的影響；在四種MPC材料中，僅有MBT-Au會受到氫鍵鹼(b)的影響；雖四種MPC材料皆受到凡得瓦力(l)作用，但此作用力則以C8SH-Au有最大之影響力。此外，我們以四個相同MPC材料進行測試發現：阻抗式化學陣列所呈現之反應與QCM陣列有所差異，主要是MPC吸附氣體時，阻抗的訊號是受到核與核距離改變所影響。另外，我們以馬氏距離(Mahalanobis distance)與費雪法(Fisher method)進行兩種感測陣列之鑑別，就整體鑑別率而言：QCM(75.9%)較阻抗式化學感測陣列(60.7%)來的好；最後，若將兩種陣列合併為一種，此時即有8組感測陣列訊號，鑑別率將提升至86.7%。
Gold nanoclusters capped with four different functional thiolate were synthesized via two phase approach. The diameter of nanoclusters determined by TEM are ranging from 2 to 6 nm. The sensing properties of monolayer protected gold nanoclusters (MPCs) were probed on both QCM and micro-interdigital electrodes. Vapor sensing selectivity which is dominated by the shell ligand structure of MPC was demonstrated.    QCM represents the mass change during the sorption of organic vapor into MPCs. The partition coefficient , K , can be estimated by this approach. We have taken further calculations to establish the linear solvation energy relationship model (LSER) for MPCs. The salvation parameters reveal the chemical force behind the selective vapor sorption behavior of MPC MOP-Au process significant dipole-dipole attraction (s) as well as H-bond acidity (a). Among four MPCs materials, only MBT-Au shows effective H-bond basicity (b). All MPCs rely on Van der Waals force (l), but C8SH-Au has the largest Van der Waals force than other three MPCs.    Furthermore, we found that the vapor response patterns of MPC coated QCM array are somehow different than that of same MPC coated chemiresistor. It is because the effectiveness of transferring the sorbed mass into the core-to-core distance change are different from one MPC to another. In addition, we perform statistical analysis using Mahalanobis distance and Fisher's method to determine the recognition of these sensor arrays. We found that QCM array has better recognition rate (75.9%) than that of chemiresistor (60.7%).Finally, if two arrays were joined as one array of eight sensors, the recognition rate increase to 86.7% which is still using four sensing materials only.
