女性護理人員之罹病風險及常見疾病之研究
A Study on Morbidity Risk and Common Disease of Nurses
女性護理人員、相對危險性、職業衛生、環境衛生、布阿松迴歸、盛行密度
背景和目的：在世界衛生組織積極推動健康城市、健康促進學校、醫院及工作場所之際，以場所性的健康促進之策略是公認為最有效的方式。護理人員位居醫療保健體系中的第一線位置，需面對不同疾病嚴重度之病患及死亡，加上醫院複雜的環境，潛在許多健康危害之因子，因此為了瞭解護理人員之健康情形，故本研究主要目的為探討女性護理人員在執業期間門診就醫盛行率及就醫病因，以及全病因及病因別門診相對危險性。材料與方法：資料來源為我國「全民健保學術研究資料庫」之醫事人員基本資料檔、醫事機構基本檔、門診醫療費用清單明細檔與承保抽樣歸人檔等四個資料庫，自「醫事人員基本資料檔」（累計至2003年底）中擷取出暴露組護理人員27,624位與女性醫事人員對照A組19,549位以及從「承保抽樣歸人檔」中選取一般女性工作者（對照B組）共39,088 位，分別串連門診處方及治療明細檔資料。利用布阿松迴歸模式估計護理人員門診疾病之盛行密度以及相對於對照組個案之全病因及病因別罹病相對危險性。結果：研究結果顯示平均年齡為29.55±7.55歲之女性護理人員研究世代，以門診呼吸系統疾病之盛行密度26,28人次/每104人年為最高，而盛行密度最低之系統疾病為血液疾病（403人次/每104人年）。此外，影響女性護理人員門診風險之因素包括：年齡別、醫事機構所在地、醫事機構權屬別及醫事機構類別等，尤其隨著女性護理人員年齡的增加，系統疾病門診之相對危險性均顯著呈現上升趨勢。女性護理人員之門診感染與寄生蟲疾病及妊娠合併症風險均較對照組個案為高情形。相較於女性醫事人員，女性護理人員風險較高之診斷還包括：門診精神疾病（ARR=1.12）、循環系統疾病（ARR=1.14）及泌尿生殖系統疾病（ARR=1.20），但相對於一般女性工作者這些疾病其門診相對危險性卻顯著降低；而女性護理人員相較一般女性工作者則是以感染與寄生蟲疾病（ARR=1.22）、血液疾病（ARR=1.15）、神經系統和感覺器官疾病（ARR=1.02）及皮膚與皮下組織（ARR=1.07）等四種疾病門診之危險性顯著增加者。結論：本研究數據顯示，年齡仍是影響女性護理人員各系統疾病門診風險非常重要的因子之一，此外，許多系統疾病也存在明顯的地理區域及機構特性（醫院/診所及評鑑等級）變異情形。研究數據也顯示女性護理人員之罹病風險普遍較一般女性工作者低，但與女性醫事人員類似，未來研究可以本研究之發現為基礎，進一步探討影響女性護理人員罹病風險之職業相關危險因子。
Background and Purpose With the strong advocacy of healthy cities concept by World Health Organization, the strategies of health promotion in schools, hospitals, and work places are regarded as the most effective measures. Encountering different severities of patients and their deaths together with their complicated hospitals’ environment are potential health hazards to the nursing staff who are the forefront position of health care system. In order to understand the health status of nursing staffs, we studied the prevalence of their ambulatory care visits, the causes of illness, and the hazard ratios of overall and specific diseases during their occupational period.Materials and Methods We used registry for medical personnel, registry for contracted medical facilities, ambulatory care expenditures by visits, and sampled registry of beneficiaries from the National Health Insurance Research Database. From the registry of medical personnel (which accumulated up to the end of 2003), we selected the 27,624 female nursing staffs as the exposed group, and 19,549 other female medical personnel as the control group A. We again selected 39,088 ordinary workingwomen as the control group B from the sampled registry of beneficiaries, and all groups were separately linked to the ambulatory care expenditures by visits. By using Poisson regression analysis, we estimated the prevalence densities of ambulatory illnesses of the nursing staffs, and the hazard ratios of overall and specific diseases compared to their control groups.Results The mean age of our study cohort was 29.55±7.55. The highest prevalence density was the disease of respiratory system (2,628/ 1,000 person-years) while the lowest prevalence density was hematological disease (403/ 1,000 person-years). The risk factors for ambulatory care visits of the female nursing staff were age, and geographic area, type and grading of medical facilities. With the increasing age of the nursing staffs, the risks of ambulatory visits of systemic illness were found to be higher. The risks of infectious and parasitic diseases, complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and puerperium were elevated in female nursing staffs compared to their control groups. Compared to the other female medical personnel, female nursing staffs have higher risks of mental disorders (Adjusted rate ratio [ARR]=1.12), disease of circulatory system (ARR=1.14), and disease of genitourinary system (ARR=1.20), but they were not higher compared to those of ordinary workingwomen. Female nursing staffs also had higher risks of infectious and parasitic diseases (ARR=1.22), hematological disease (ARR=1.15), disease of nervous system and sense organs (ARR=1.02), and disease of skin and subcutaneous tissue (ARR=1.07) compared to the ordinary workingwomen.Conclusions Our study showed age still was one of the important risk factors of influencing ambulatory care visits in female nursing staffs. Moreover, type of systemic illnesses varied significantly with geographic area and specific character of medical facilities. The risks of female nursing staffs were lower than those of ordinary workingwomen, but they were the same with those of other female medical personnel. Based on our study results, we have to explore the occupation-associated risk factors of female nursing staffs in the future.
