好禮多選一之適用情境分析
The study on the contexts of multiple-choice premium promotion.

贈品促銷
選擇困難度
贈品吸引力
最適刺激水準
群組比較


在台灣「好禮多選一」直接贈送禮品的促銷方式相當普遍可見，然而目前有關直接贈送免費禮品之促銷方式的文獻尚有不足，故本文欲針對「好禮多選一」該促銷方式做進一步地深入研究，試圖找出其適用情境以供國內廠商參考，並彌補贈品促銷領域之研究缺口。本研究共發展四個實驗設計，分別研究目的為，實驗一：探討好禮多選一之贈品選項多寡，如何影響消費者對贈品之預期滿意度以及對該促銷的知覺價值與購買意願。實驗二：探討消費者對好禮多選一之贈品偏好以及贈品選擇機會有無，將如何影響消費者之知覺價值與購買意願。實驗三：探討主產品與贈品之選擇性有無，如何影響消費者對促銷之知覺價值與購買意願。實驗四：探討好禮多選一是否會產生群組比較，進而造成贈品價值降低。依據上述四個實驗結果顯示：一、當贈品選擇越多樣性時，消費者對該促銷會產生較高的知覺價值與購買意願，此外在過多贈品選項當中挑選贈品時，消費者對於選擇贈品之決策過程會感到較為困難。二、當贈品吸引力高的情況下，消費者之知覺價值與購買意願比贈品吸引力低的情況下來的高。並且當贈品吸引力高的情況下，消費者之選擇偏好比贈品吸引力低的情況下高。三、主產品選擇性與贈品選擇性之間是存有交互作用。當主產品提供多樣性選擇時，贈品多樣性不會讓消費者對該促銷之知覺價值與購買意願有顯著地提升；當主產品沒有選擇性時，贈品提供多樣性選擇則會使消費者對該促銷之知覺價值與購買意願有顯著地提升。四、好禮多選一促銷方式是否會產生群組比較，其將視贈品同質性程度而定。當贈品同質性程度高時，消費者較容易在贈品間進行比較，進而會降低每一項贈品原有價值，故會有贈品在單獨出現時比出現群組內時更有可能被選上之現象出現。
The multiple-choice premiums promotion is quite common in Taiwan, but the literature about this field is insufficient at present. Therefore, the purpose of this research is to further investigate the promotion of multiple-choice premiums to attempt to find out some rule of using this promotion. This research contains four studies. The purpose of study 1 is to know the influence of limited versus extensive choice of multiple-choice premiums promotion on consumers’ perceived value and purchase intention. The purpose of study 2 is to discuss the influence of premium attractiveness and choice chance on consumers’ perceived value, purchase intention and the premium of anticipated satisfaction. The purpose of study 3 is to find out the influence of the option context of promoted products and premiums on consumers’ perceived value and purchase intention. Finally, the purpose of study 4 is to discuss whether the promotion of multiple-choice premiums would hurt the value of premium. According to the results of the four studies, we have some findings as follows1.  Consumers who encountered the extensive-choice condition have higher perceived value and purchase intention than exposed to the limited-choice condition. Besides, consumers encountering extensive choices reported the decision-making process to be more difficult than consumers encountering limited choices.2.  Consumers in the more preferred condition have higher perceived value and purchase intention than consumers in the less preferred condition. Besides, consumers who encountered the more preferred condition have higher preference of choosing than exposed to the less preferred condition.3.  There is a significant interaction effect between the variety of promoted products and the variety of premiums. When the promoted products offer the diversified options, the variety of the premiums will not improve consumers’ perceived value and purchase intention; whereas in the promoted product without alternative, the variety of the premiums will be observably improved consumers’ perceived value and purchase intention.4.  Whether the promotion of multiple-choice premiums focuses within-group comparison, it depends on the homogeneity of premiums. When the homogeneity is higher, the consumers would focus on the promotion of multiple-choice premiums within-group comparison easily which hurts the value of premium. As a result, a premium is more likely to be chosen in the promotion of single premium than multiple-choice premiums.
