如何量計信用風險一個市場基礎模式的實證研究
Measure for the credit riskan empirical study using a market-based theory
risk-free rate、credit risk premium、expected loss、probability of default、無風險利率、信用風險溢酬、預期債權損失率、違約機率
近年來，隨著金融自由化與國際化之潮流，台灣的銀行總分支機構家數不斷地遞增，並在短期間內增加許多同性質的競爭者。然而因存放款市場在有限情形下，金融業務並未同幅度成長，反而各金融機構間的業務競爭環境更激烈。新銀行與老銀行競爭，公營行庫與民營銀行競爭，外國銀行與本國銀行競爭，而銀行又與非銀行金融機構競爭，使得銀行存放款利差縮小，授信品質降低，銀行獲利下降及逾放比率上升。據此，銀行業承受比以往更大的信用風險。本研究以國內某家金融機構為研究對象，經由核貸個案的短、中、長期貸款之貸放利率與無風險利率差異，並藉由風險中立之市場基礎模式的評估模式作為本文實證研究主軸，在不同回復率下，由模型「內生決定」貸款的違約機率，分別求出樣本銀行之信用風險溢酬，再將對象依不同產業區分，分別求出不同產業的信用風險溢酬、違約機率、債權損失率、違約暴險額。經由不同產業分析結果，本研究發現在不同產業的風險溢酬、違約機率、預期債權損失率之估計值，皆以製造業最低，而最高的產業皆為服務業。所以本研究認為銀行在承做放款業務時，應該先評估授信戶所屬之產業，方能有效掌控銀行承做風險。職此之故，本研究建構出一套符合「新版巴賽爾協定」（The New Basel Capital Accord ）之企業授信信用風險模型，以提升銀行經營形象與實質競爭力，並發揮執行容易，內生決定與可應用授信利率決策及貸放准駁依據之重要功能。
In recent years, upon the trends of financial freedom and internationalization, banks in Taiwan are increasingly set up, which leads to raise many competitors in a short time.  Due to the limited loan and saving markets, the business of financial industry does not grow in parallel.  On the contrary, the business competitions among financial institutions are more serious, such as old bank vs. new bank, public bank vs. private bank, foreign bank vs. local bank, and bank vs. other financial institution.  All these competitions decrease the profit of difference on savings and loans, influence the quality of credit, lower the profit of banks, and increase expired rate of loans.  Hence, the bank industry bears with more credit risks than before.The research subject was one of financial institutions in Taiwan.  Through comparing the differences of the short, median, and long terms on loan rate and risk-free rate,  this study presented a formal methodology, an empirical investigation using a market-based risk neutral approach.  In the variant recovery rate, the probability of default is endogenously determined.  Then, based on different industries, the credit risk premium, probability of default, loss given default and exposure at default were separately estimated.Through analyzing the different industries, the findings indicated that the manufacturing industry showed the least estimate rates on risk premium, expected loss, and default probability, whereas the service industry exhibited the highest.  Accordingly, this study suggests that if the banks want to do the loan business in future, they have to assess the industry type first for effectively controlling the risks.  In addition, this study establishes a model of enterprise credit risk with implementation of the New Basel capital Accord, which will enhance the business image and actual competition of banks as well as developing those important functions as easily executed, endogenous determined, applied decision-making on pricing rate, and the criterion on loan permission.
