學好翻譯基本功：檢視台灣國中英語科參考書的課文中譯問題以第五冊康軒、南一、翰林、朗文版部分課文為例
Acquiring Basic Translation Ability---To Examine the English-to-Chinese Translation In Reference Books Published Along With English Textbooks For Ninth Graders In Taiwan Taking Four Different Versions Of Reference Books As Example---Kang Hsuan, Nani, Han
國中英語參考書、課文中譯、翻譯問題、康軒、南一、翰林、朗文
隨著教學法的演進，當今多數國中英語教師所採行的溝通式語言教學法(Communicative Language Approach)，不主張在教學過程中，對教材內容，進行中文翻譯。然教科書出版商所發行的英語科參考書，多仍保留教材的全文中譯。本論文即針對此部份加以探討，檢視其中的翻譯問題，也藉此尋找一些可能在國中階段養成的不良翻譯慣性。並以市面上常見的四種版本－康軒、南一、翰林、朗文版的第五冊為討論對象。第一章緒論，旨在說明本論文的研究動機、對象、研究目的與價值，兼及文獻探討與研究方法。第二章是針對「翻譯」本身的論述，包含翻譯的歷史沿革與定義、譯者的角色與條件，隨後論及各種翻譯的標準。第三章則淺論各種外語教學法與翻譯的關係，並回顧台灣英語教學歷來所採行的教學法。第四、五章分別呈現國中英語教科書與參考書的角色、課程標準、審定與選用、參考書內容簡介、與學生使用參考書情形概述等，俾對國中英語教科書以及本論文的檢視標的，有一較為清楚的認識與瞭解。第六章正式對四個版本的參考書中譯部份進行檢視，列舉所發現的翻譯問題，並附上改譯參考與原因，最後一節則提出翻譯問題總結。第七章第一節是結論，二、三節分別是給參考書出版社、編輯人員、以及國中英語科教師的建議。
Nowadays, with the dominant foreign language teaching method in Taiwan turns to Communicative Language Teaching, English-to-Chinese translation for the context of English textbooks is not allowed in the classrooms of seventh to ninth graders. However, students continue to use translation, especially from English into Chinese, as a means of language learning. Without the guidance for translation from their English teachers at school, seeking solution from reference books is the possibly best option for students because English-to-Chinese translation for the context of English textbooks can still be seen in most of the reference books published along with English textbooks. The quality of the English-to-Chinese translation presented in these reference books thus plays an important role to students’ cultivation of certain translation habits. This thesis is aimed to examine the translation mentioned above and four different versions of reference books are chosen--- Kang Hsuan（康軒）, Nani（南一）, Hanlin（翰林）, and Longman（朗文）. (Book Five for all)    This thesis is divided into seven chapters. The first chapter includes motivation, statement of the problem, purposes and significance of the study, literature review, and research methods. The second chapter is about “translation” itself. Quite a few issues are discussed, including the definition of translation, the role that translators play, the qualifications of being a translator, and the standards of translation. The third chapter reviews the roles that translation play in different foreign language teaching methods, and teaching methods which have been adopted in Taiwan since 1940s. The fourth chapter shows the compilation processes of English textbooks for seventh to ninth graders in Taiwan. The fifth chapter is mainly an introduction to reference books published along with English textbooks for seventh to ninth graders.    The sixth chapter examines and evaluates the English-to-Chinese translation for the context of English textbooks in the reference books chosen by the author of this thesis. The purpose is to find out inappropriate translation and to provide possible revisions. The last chapter is conclusion. With the revelation of translation problems in the previous chapter, it is obvious that the English-to-Chinese translation in the reference books published along with English textbooks needs to be improved. Certain suggestions are given to publishers and editors of these reference books to achieve this goal. Also, suggestions are given to English teachers of seventh to ninth graders to reassess the possible role of English-to-Chinese translation in the field of foreign language teaching. To ban or to devaluate the use of translation in the classroom is not necessarily the best way out. It is recommended that teachers infuse their students with basic concepts of translation and point out the differences between English and Chinese in syntaxes, grammar, and usages.    For most people, English taught to seventh to ninth graders is fundamental and simple, and it is the same to translate it into Chinese. However, certain wrong ways of translation learned when students are in their seventh to ninth grade may hinder translation done hereafter from being excellent. It is time to pay more attention to English-to-Chinese translation in this period and re-evaluate their importance.
