家庭氣氛、親子關係及同儕關係之研究－以苗栗市高中、職學生為例
A Study of Family's Atmosphere, Parent-child Relationship and Peer Relationship－Take High School Students in Miao-Li for Example
家庭氣氛、親子關係、父子關係、母子關係、同儕關係

本研究之主旨在瞭解苗栗市高中、職學生家庭氣氛的品質，與父親、與母親，以及與同儕情感互動關係，進而探討家庭氣氛、親子關係及同儕關係三者間的相關性與影響。本研究採用問卷調查法，以設籍於苗栗縣、市，並就讀苗栗市公、私立高中、職日間部二年級的學生，而且父母親的婚姻狀況是「已婚」，並與研究對象「同住」者為研究對象，經立意抽樣，實得486份有效樣本。施測所得之資料，使用描述性統計、信度分析、皮爾森積差相關分析與迴歸分析等統計方式加以分析。本研究結果如下：一、苗栗市高中、職學生之家庭氣氛、父子關係、母子關係、同儕關係皆在中間值之上，尚稱中等。二、苗栗市高中、職學生之家庭氣氛與親子關係間達顯著相關。三、苗栗市高中、職學生之家庭氣氛與同儕關係間達顯著相關。四、苗栗市高中、職學生之父子關係、母子關係與同儕關係間皆達顯著相關。五、家庭氣氛對父子關係及母子關係有影響。六、家庭氣氛對同儕關係有影響。七、親子關係對同儕關係有影響。歸納研究結果，提出具體建議，以供實務應用與未來研究之參考。
This study aims to explore the status quo of family atmosphere, parent-child relationship, and peer relationship of senior high school students in Miao-Li and to analyze the influential factors among them.The research adopts questionnaires collected from students in the second year of senior high schools in Miao-Li City, including private, public, and vocational schools. The objects of the research should be those whose parents’ marital status is “married” and those whose parents “live together” with them. The purpose sampling, among which 486 are valid.The statistical methods used to analyze the data are descriptive statistics, Cronbach α, Pearson’s Product-Moment Correltaion, and simple regression.The major findings of the study are as follows1. Generally speaking, family atmosphere, parent-child relationship and peer relationship of senior high school students in Miao-Li are at the intermediate level.2. There are significant correlations between family atmosphere and parent-child relationship.3. There are significant correlations between family atmosphere and peer relationship4. There are significant correlations between father-son relationship or mother-child relationship and peer relationship.5. Family atmosphere has high prediction for father-son relationship or mother-child relationship.6. Family atmosphere has high prediction for peer relationship.7. Parent-child relationship has high prediction for peer relationship.Based on these findings, suggestions for educational administrations, counseling institutions, and further research are presented.
