家長參與幼兒入園準備及幼兒在幼兒園適應之相關研究
The study of the relation between parent involvement in the preschool readiness and new preschoolers’ adjustment
家長參與、入園準備、幼兒園適應
本研究旨在了解家長參與幼兒入園準備及幼兒在幼兒園適應之情形，並進一步探討家長參與幼兒入園準備對幼兒在幼兒園適應之解釋情形。    本研究採用問卷調查的方式，以台北縣初入公立幼兒園中班就讀之幼童為研究對象，使用「家長參與幼兒入園準備量表」和「幼兒園適應量表」等測量工具，共計發出452份問卷，得有效問卷401份。研究資料經描述性統計、單因子變異數、積差相關以及多元和逐步迴歸分析，其主要發現如下：一、在幼兒入園準備方面，家長在「幼兒準備」方面所做的準備，以生活自理所做的準備最多，其次是表達與基本知能、社會情緒，而家長在衛生習慣方面所做的準備最少；家長在「家園準備」方面所做的準備，以在家庭方面所做的準備多於在園所方面的準備。二、幼兒在幼兒園適應這五個層面中整體適應情形，以在「正向情緒表現」方面的適應較好，其次是「同儕相處能力」、「作息適應」、「正向社會行為」，而以「自我能力」方面的適應較差。三、由差異考驗可發現，幼兒性別不同，會使家長在「生活自理」和「衛生習慣」這二方面的準備呈現顯著差異；且女生在幼兒園的適應情形也較男生為佳，且達顯著差異。此外，幼兒社經背景不同，對家長在「家庭方面」和「園所方面」所做的準備會有顯著差異；社經地位的高低也會對幼兒在幼兒園的適應情形造成差異。四、從整體的幼兒入園準備和幼兒園適應的五個層面、整體幼兒園適應來看，皆呈現顯著的正相關，表示家長參與幼兒入園準備愈多，幼兒在幼兒園的適應也會愈好。五、「表達與基本知能」、「幼兒性別」和「社經地位」對幼兒園適應的五個層面「正向情緒表現」、「同儕相處能力」、「作息適應」、「正向社會行為」和「自我能力」皆具有正向的預測力。    本研究最後根據研究結果，提出建議以供幼兒家長、幼兒園、政府機構以及相關實務工作者參考，並提供未來研究可進行的方向。
The purpose of this study is to understand parent involvement in preschool readiness and preschoolers’ school adjustment and to explore the effect of parent involvement in preschool readiness on preschoolers’ school adjustment.    This research employs the questionnaire survey to study preschoolers newly admitted to public preschools of Taipei County. The measurements including parent involvement in preschool readiness scale and preschool adjustment scale. All together, 452 questionnaires are issued and 401 valid questionnaires are retrieved. Research data are analyzed via descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, Pearson correlation and stepwise multiple regression analyses. Major findings include1. In the dimension of preschool readiness, most of the parent involvement has been focused on self-help skills, followed by expression and basic skills and social emotions. Preschoolers are least prepared by their parents for taking care of personal hygiene. In the dimension of parental involvement for family-preschool preparation, family preparation is provided more than preschool preparation.2. Among the five dimensions of preschool adjustment, preschoolers perform better in positive affect within the school setting, followed by peer competence, adjustment to preschool routines, prosocial behavior, and ego strength.3. The t-test results reveal that preschoolers’ gender results in significant difference in their parent involvement of self-help skills and personal hygiene. Girls’ preschool adjustment is significantly better than that of their boy counterpart. Further, family socio-economic background of preschoolers also significantly affects their parents’ family preparation and preschool preparation. Family socio-economic status also affects preschoolers’ preschool adjustment.4. The overall parent involvement in preschool readiness and the five dimensions of preschool adjustment are positively correlated. The results indicate that the more parents involve in preschool readiness, the better their preschoolers’ preschool adjustment perform.5. Expression and basic skills, preschooler gender and family socio-economic status have positive prediction on positive affect within the school setting, peer competence, adjustment to preschool routines, prosocial behavior, and ego strength.    Based on research findings and conclusions above, this study proposes recommendations for parents of preschoolers, preschools, government agencies and related field workers, as well as suggestions for future studies.
