實體產業廠商運用網路自助服務之消費者使用意願研究
The Study of Consumers’ Intention of Using Web-Based Self-Service in Physical Industry
網路自助服務、網站可用性、科技接受模式

資訊科技的進步帶給企業很大的衝擊與挑戰，因為服務不單單只能透過服務人員做傳遞，還可以透過自助服務科技，例如自動語音處理系統、互動式服務亭及網際網路等方式作為與消費者溝通的媒介。實體產業廠商面臨人力成本上升的壓力，紛紛引進網路此一新興科技，改善營運的效率與服務品質，然而消費者對網路自助服務的接受度卻是影響廠商推行網路自助服務成功與否的關鍵因素。為了探討消費者的使用意願，本研究以科技接受模式做為發展消費者使用意願模型的理論基礎，透過實驗情境法探討網路自助服務的回應性、控制性與存取速度對使用意願的影響，找出影響消費者使用網路自助服務的關鍵因素，並提供實體產業廠商做為設計、管理網路自助服務之策略建議與參考方針。本研究經由實證分析的結果發現，網路自助服務的回應性、控制性與存取速度三者皆對消費者的使用意願有正面顯著的影響。其中，控制性是影響消費者使用意願最關鍵的因素，因為他們可以不需依賴服務人員就能自行完成服務，且能掌控整個服務的過程與結果。因此，企業在設計網路自助服務時，若提供消費者較高的彈性修改與變動資料的能力，會增加他們對該網站知覺有用的程度，進而提高使用意願。另外，回應性對消費者使用網路自助服務的意願有正面顯著的影響，若實體產業廠商提供良好的回饋機制與溝通管道，如常見問題集、問題留言版、電子郵件等，對消費者的使用意願是有幫助的。最後，網頁的存取速度也會正面影響到消費者使用網路自助服務的意願。所以，實體產業廠商除了要提供消費者較高的掌控能力與較佳的回應性外，也必須要讓網路自助服務的網頁存取速度維持在合理的範圍，避免造成消費者因等待時間過長而不願意使用網路來自助服務。本研究建議實體產業廠商於設計網路自助服務時，需要加強服務傳遞的彈性與變動之能力，讓消費者有較高的自我控制權，並提供良好的問題解決管道，且加快服務傳遞的速度，以增加消費者使用網路自助服務的意願。
The improvement of technology has strong impacts and challenges on companies because service is not only delivered by employees, but also by self-service technologies, such as interactive voice response systems, interactive KIOSK and Internet. Physical industry facing the pressure of raising labor cost, start to apply the advanced technology to improve the operational efficiency and service quality. But the key to introduce the web-based self-service (WBSS) is the acceptance of consumers. In order to explore the usage of the consumers’ intention, we adopt the technology acceptance model to develop the usage of web-based self-service. Through the scenarios experiment, we find out the influence of consumers’ intention by responsiveness, controllability and access speed. It can provide physical industries guidelines of how to design and manager the web-based self-service.After the empirical analysis, we found that responsiveness, controllability and access speed will influence the consumers’ intention of using the web-based self-service. Above all, controllability has the greatest impact on the consumers’ intention of using WBSS, because they can control the process of the service independently. In order to enhance their intention of using WBSS, physical industries should provide higher flexibility to consumers during the delivery of service. In addition, responsiveness also has a positive impact on the consumers’ intention of using WBSS. It will be helpful if physical industries can provide good feedbacks and communication channels, such as frequently asked questions, message boards and e-mail to consumers. Finally, the access speed of web page will influence the consumers’ intention of using WBSS. Therefore, physical industries not only provide the higher flexibility, good feedbacks and communication channels to consumers, but also need to maintain the speed of web page, avoiding the waiting time causing the negative impact on consumers. We suggest that physical industries should enhance their flexibility of service, feedback mechanisms and the speed of web pages to enhance consumers’ intention of using WBSS.
