寧握護理對早產兒接受侵入性治療後生理性影響之研究
Containment on physical response for those taken invasive treatment premature infant research
早產兒、寧握護理、侵入性治療
本研究的目的在探討寧握護理於早產兒接受侵入性治療後，對體重，心跳，呼吸次數，血氧濃度變化影響。採類實驗性設計，以北部某區域教學醫院新生兒加護病房之早產兒為研究對象，立意取樣符合收案條件者。將研究對象分為控制組與實驗組。控制組15位，依加護病房常規護理照護模式提供照護，實驗組16位，除提供常規性照護外，並於每次接受侵入性治療後，給予寧握護理措施。所得資料以描述性統計，平均數，95％信賴區間，卡方檢定，t檢定，Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test、repeated measures進行統計分析。    研究結果顯示：（一）體重方面：收案時，控制組比實驗組平均體重重239公克，但實驗組至研究第5天，體重即呈現穩定成長，控制組至第8天才趨於平穩。到第18天，實驗組之平均體重曲線圖斜率已超過控制組。（二）在照護活動次數方面：最頻繁照護活動依序為抽痰，腳跟採血，裝置鼻胃管，經皮中央靜脈導管（PCVC）。（三）對心跳次數影響：1.無論是抽痰，腳跟採血，裝置鼻胃管或是PCVC，對心跳的影響其速率皆會增加。其中以PCVC及腳跟採血影響最甚，其次是裝置鼻胃管與抽痰。2.在抽痰治療後，實驗組較控制組在心跳影響變異性小。3.接受腳跟採血治療，實驗組於腳跟採血後第9分鐘心跳趨於平穩，控制組則至第16分鐘才穩定，因此，實驗組回復基準值的時間比控制組快。（四）對呼吸次數影響：1.裝置鼻胃管與腳跟採血，PCVC及抽痰在呼吸次數影響上，皆達到統計上顯著差異。2.在PCVC、採腳跟血、抽痰皆會使呼吸下降，而裝置鼻胃管會使呼吸速率增加。3.實驗組在接受腳跟採血治療後呼吸次數達统計上顯著差異。（五）對血氧濃度之影響：1.在侵入性治療後，血氧濃度會明顯降低，影響程度以裝置鼻胃管最小，其次為腳跟採血，之後是PCVC，而抽痰影響最大。2.在抽痰治療後，血氧濃度控制組比實驗組低，變異性大，各時間變化皆達統計上顯著差異。3.腳跟採血實驗組較控制組平均值為高，且實驗組在扎針後第8分鐘即恢復採血前之血氧濃度，而控制組至扎針後第16分鐘才恢復。4.在PCVC侵入性治療實驗組並無明顯變化，而控制組血氧濃度下降至88％，治療後第11分鐘，血氧濃度才恢復平穩。變異數分析中，顯示控制組與實驗組交互作用達顯著水準。    整體而言，寧握護理可以達到穩定生理性的反應，特別是在血氧濃度的變化。同時，寧握護理提供一個簡單，無須醫囑，護理人員可獨立執行的一項非侵入性照護活動，不僅發揮護理獨特功能，亦能在加護病房之早產兒在最不穩定情況下，以維持生理上穩定，達到改善護理品質的目的。
The purpose of this research is to study Containment affect on those taken Invasive Treatment premature infant, the affects including baby weight, heart beat, frequency of taking breath, SpaO2. The experiment was taken premature infant of one local hospital in the north of Taiwan. The experimental cases were been set in two groups one was called Control group the other one called Experimental group. Control group has 15 people and follow the regular procedure of nursing, The experimental group has 16 people beside the regular nursing procedure taking, but also, taking Invasive Treatment like suction, heel stick,Percutaneous Central Venous Catheter(PCV),on-nasogastric tube etc. All data were analyzed using Descriptive Statistics, Mean, 95% confidence interval, chi-square, t-tes, Wilcoxon signed-ranks test,repeated measures statistics analysis。     The research results indicate  1.Body Weight：at beginning of data collect the body weight of premature infant of control group compare to experiment group was heavier around 239g in average, however, the experiment group at 5th day their weight show steady increase rate ,but the control group show steady increase rate after 8th day, more interesting data show on 18th day the experimental group their slew rate of average weight curve is higher than control group.2.Nursing activities count The most often nursing activities taken is suction, coming next is heel stick, and then on-nasogastric tube installed, coming last is PCVC.3.Heart beat (1) No matter what suction，heel stick，on-nasogastric tube installed or PCVC, they all will increase the heart beat pulse rate. Among that PCVC and heel stick are mostly affect, and then on-nasogastric tube installed and suction.(2) After taking suction treatment, the experimental group their heart beat pulse change rate is small than control group.(3) for the data of heel stick affect on heart beat the experimental group their average heart beat pulse get in stable at 9th minutes, but control group get in stable till 16th minutes, so that, with containment treatment experimental group they get stable more quickly. 4.Breath taking times  (1)On-nasogastric tube installed, heel stick, PCVC and suction relation to breath taking times, they all meet the statistically significant difference.(2) Invasive treatment taken like PCVC, heel stick and suction they all caused breath taking times slow down, but On-nasogastric tube installed will increase the rate of breath taking。(3) with containment experimental group after taking the heel stick their breath taking time figure are meet statistically significant. 5. SpaO2(1)After taking invasive treatment ,the SpaO2 will drop obviously, their are ranking from suction, PCVC, heel stick then on-nasogastric tube.(2) during taking the suction no matter what control group or experimental group their blood oxygen rate will drop but control group is lower than experimental group, with bigger difference vs. time scale their difference was significant.(3) heel stick, experimental group its average blood oxygen value is higher than control group, with containment treatment heel stick experimental group, their heel oxygen come back to before punched level at 8th minutes ,but control group come back to original level after 16th minutes .(4)For PCVC with containment its blood oxygen does not much change in experimental group, But control group its blood oxygen drop down to 88％, After execute PCVC invasive treatment till 11th minutes its blood oxygen come back stable, indicate control group and experimental group cross reacted to meet statistically significant.    In general to say, containment taken can help to reach stable physical reaction, especially on blood oxygen. In the mean time, containment provide a simple way, without doctor instruction, nurses can taking their own to execute the invasive treatment or nursing, not only devote nursing unique function but also provide nursing quality and keep physiology stable at the condition of premature infant at intensive care unique in unstable condition.
