專業型獨立契約者的專案知識特性與顧客溝通策略配適對溝通品質影響之研究
The fit between project knowledge characteristics and communication strategy- the impact on communication quality for professional independent contractors
專業型獨立契約者、知識特性、溝通策略、溝通品質
近年來，企業將部分重要工作或是核心活動外包予具有專業知識技術的暫時性工作者。這類型的工作者稱為專業型獨立契約者(PIC)，其具有專業知識、技術，程度相當於專家地位，執行委託公司之任務並獨立完成該專案。  專業型獨立契約者必須與顧客維持良好溝通品質以維持與顧客長期的合作關係。然而，專案內容之知識特性會影響雙方之溝通品質，故在溝通之過程中採取適當之溝通策略是必要的。因此，本研究以知識基礎論出發，採用配適之觀點來探討不同專案知識特性、溝通策略與溝通品質之配適關係。  本研究以電子郵件之方式寄發問卷予MY CASE網站之專業型獨立契約者並同時以雪球抽樣之方式增加樣本數。研究結果顯示，專案內容為垂直整合之知識特性時，溝通策略以較高溝通頻率與間接溝通內容為主；專案內容為水平整合之知識特性時，溝通策略以較低溝通頻率與直接溝通內容為主以達到良好的溝通品質。而專案內容為實體移轉之知識特性時，溝通策略以較低溝通頻率與直接溝通內容為主；專案內容為能力移轉之知識特性時，溝通策略以較高溝通頻率與間接溝通內容為主以達到良好的溝通品質。最後，本研究亦對於研究結果提供管理上與後續研究之建議。
Outsourcing is emerging in the growing competitive market. By contracting out their business activities, firms delegate more professional contingent workers, to offer excellent products or services to the public. Professional contingent workers who gradually become experts, providing professional knowledge which firms lack are called professional independent contractor (PIC).Good communication quality is important for PIC to maintaining a consistent partnership and customer satisfaction. However, project knowledge characteristics could affect communication quality between PIC and their customers so that communication strategy in the communication process is necessary. This study explored the relationship of knowledge characteristic and communication strategy fit for communication quality.  This study provided questionnaires to professional independent contractors by E-mail which is acquired from http  www.mycase.com.tw. Since it is difficult to contact with PIC, this study adopted snowball sampling to enhance the amount of sample collection.  The findings in the study are shown as below(1)as PIC implements a vertical integration project, communication strategy has higher frequency and more indirect content to attain good communication quality.(2)as PIC implements a horizontal integration project, communication strategy has lower frequency and more direct content to attain good communication quality.(3)as PIC implements a material transfer project, communication strategy has lower frequency and more direct content to attain good communication quality.(4)as PIC implements a capability transfer project, communication strategy has higher frequency and more indirect content to attain good communication quality.  According to the findings, some suggestions are proposed in management and following-up researches in the study.
