尋找纜線寬頻潛在客戶之研究~以A有線電視為例
The Study on Seeking for Potential Customers of the Broadband Cable Service by a Cable TV Station
纜線寬頻、顧客關係管理、資料採礦、決策樹
本研究依照有線電視系統業者擁有獨立經營區域且擁有眾多現行收視客戶群之特點，且可採用同軸線纜（HFC）寬頻技術上網的優勢，藉由資料採礦（Data Mining）及客戶關係管理（CRM）等相關理論為研究工具，尋找纜線寬頻潛在顧客並有效地開發新顧客，提供現有纜線寬頻業者參考及相關學者進一步研究之用。本研究以A有線電視公司現行纜線寬頻的顧客資料（約2000筆）為基礎加以萃取，利用卡方檢定、削減錯誤法先行對寬頻客戶資料各變數檢視其關聯性，再擇適當的資料變數。最後利用決策樹來進行分析，找出最佳之客戶預測模式，並建構出適合行銷推廣纜線寬頻之最佳顧客回應模式。最終目的希望能協助有線電視寬頻產值開發，並正確地鎖定最佳顧客族群輪廓，進行有效率的行銷推廣活動，以降低行銷成本並增加顧客的生命期價值。最後，本研究實證所使用資料採礦的方法，確實能獲得不錯的預測結果，但因實驗資料筆數限制，影響實驗模型所建立之預測率，若能隨著纜線寬頻用戶成長，客戶資料增加，則應能有效提高預測能力。
Based on the characteristics that the local cable TV (CATV) owns an individual business area and original cable viewers and the advantages of the hybrid fiber coaxial (HFC) and Broadband network skills, CATV can dig out the potential customers of the Broadband network and develop new customers effectively by applying the theories of data mining and customer relationship management (CRM), etc.  This research can be used for further research by academics or the Broadband Cable industry’s reference.This research is based on the current cable TV audiences (about 2,000 data) that were surveyed by Chi-square test and the process of data cleaning in order to check the correlation between each variable.  During this process, the correct data variables will be culled. Lastly this research will find the best model of the customer prediction by decision tree technique, and build an excellent customers response model for the Broadband network industry.  The objective of this research is to enable the industry’s output value and aim at the group of best customers, and then promote effectively. On the other hand, it will help decrease the cost of the promotion but increase the life time value of customers.The data mining technique that we apply in this investigation actually gets positive results of prediction.  However the accuracy of the anticipation model is affected due to the limited amount of data in this research.  As the market of Broadband cable is developing, the database will keep growing and the capacity of this model will also grow as well.
