小螢幕文本呈現方式與視窗尺寸對閱讀速率、理解率、閱讀效率、滿意度之效應研究
The Effects of Text Presentation Methods and Window Sizes on Reading Speed, Comprehension, Reading Efficiency and Satisfaction
文本呈現方式、視窗尺寸、閱讀速率、理解率、閱讀效率、滿意度、閱讀態度、不良閱讀習慣、閱讀行為

本研究主要目的乃探討在個人數位助理上，四種文本呈現方式（翻頁式、捲動式、前導式、快速連續式）及二種視窗尺寸（5x6、10x12）對閱讀速率、理解率、閱讀效率及滿意度的影響，並分別以閱讀態度、不良閱讀習慣及閱讀行為干擾變項進行探討。本研究使用4x2重複量測實驗設計法，實驗樣本以便立抽樣的方式選取30位輔仁大學管理學院五個學系大學生。經由四個步驟來篩選中譯的閱讀測驗：首先由研究者選擇合適的閱讀測驗；接著使用中文可讀性公式剔除過於簡單或艱深之文章；第三，由15位輔仁大學管理學院學生填答無文章之測驗題，藉此刪去不用閱讀文章即可猜對的閱讀測驗；最後，由11位大學生進行填答完整的閱讀測驗，篩選掉難以理解的文章，留下8篇閱讀測驗為本研究之閱讀材料。本研究以應用程式及問卷為資料搜集工具，問卷主要內容包括受測者對實驗情境的滿意度、閱讀態度、閱讀行為及個人資料，應用程式則為研究者自行設計。研究假說以重複量測變異數分析進行檢定，結果顯示：(1)不同的文本呈現方式及視窗尺寸皆顯著影響閱讀速率。(2)文本呈現方式及視窗尺寸皆不會影響受測者對文章的理解程度。(3)不同的文本呈現方式及視窗尺寸皆顯著影響閱讀效率。(4)不同的文本呈現方式顯著影響滿意度；但不同的視窗尺寸只在翻頁式及捲動式二種文本呈現方式中方對滿意度有顯著影響。(5)總體而言，不論何種文本呈現方式，對閱讀速率、閱讀效率及滿意度而言，大部份的情形都是10x12視窗尺寸較佳。不論何種視窗尺寸，對閱讀速率、閱讀效率及滿意度而言，大部份的情形是以翻頁式最佳，其次為前導式。(6)閱讀行為不會干擾受測者對文本呈現方式及視窗尺寸的閱讀速率、理解率、閱讀效率及滿意度。但是閱讀態度對視窗尺寸的滿意度有干擾效果存在，其餘皆不受其干擾；不良閱讀習慣方面，對文本呈現方式的閱讀效率有干擾效果存在，其餘皆不受其干擾。
The main purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of text presentation methods (paging, scrolling, leading, and rapid serial visual presentation) and window sizes (5x6 and 10x12) on subjects’ reading speed, comprehension, reading efficiency, and interface satisfaction on a personal digital assistant. The moderating effects of reading attitude, improper reading habit and reading behavior were also examined in this study.This study was participated with 30 subjects using a 4x2 factional repeated-measurement design. The reading materials used in the experiment were carefully selected from reading comprehension tests and screened via four steps firstly, to select suitable groups of articles and questions by the researcher; secondly, to choose articles with medium difficulty by using a readability formula; thirdly, 15 undergraduates in the College of Management at Fu-Jen Catholic University took a comprehension test without reading material to screen out those easily guessable articles with no need of reading the content; finally, 11 undergraduates took an intact reading comprehension test presented with reading material and test items, and articles with obvious difficultly was deleted from the pool. The questionnaire used in this study was consisted of four sections satisfaction of interface, reading attitude, reading behavior and personal data. The experimental application was implemented by researcher.Repeated-measurement ANOVA was conducted to test the hypotheses. Main findings were presented as follows (1) Both text presentation methods and window sizes significantly influenced on subjects’ reading speed. (2) Neither text presentation methods nor window sizes had significant effect on subjects’ reading comprehension. (3) Subjects’ reading efficiency was significantly influenced by text presentation methods and window sizes. (4) Text presentation methods significantly influenced on subjects’ interface satisfaction. (5) Reading behavior had no moderating effect on subjects’ reading speed, comprehension, reading efficiency and interface satisfaction. Reading attitude and window sizes had significant interaction effect on subjects’ interface satisfaction. Improper reading habit and text presentation methods also had significant interaction effect on subjects’ reading efficiency.
