工作價值觀、個人倫理氣候知覺與倫理行為關係之研究
The Study on the Relationship among Work Values, Personal Perception of Ethical Climate and Ethical Behavior.
工作價值觀、倫理氣候、倫理行為
企業倫理議題近年來引起學術界廣泛的討論，而企業倫理除了個人道德層面的議題外，尚包括整個組織內部運作所造成的影響，其重要性不容忽視，對管理者而言，將倫理議題納入日常管理活動，應能影響組織成員的倫理認知，進而影響其行為。此外，隨著時代的改變，人們對於工作所欲追求的目標逐漸改變，過去已有實證結果顯示不同世代的人們具有不同的工作價值觀，因此，本研究從工作價值觀切入，試圖瞭解工作價值觀、個人倫理氣候知覺與倫理行為之關係。    透過實務觀察以及文獻探討確立本研究主題，本研究欲達成之研究目的：(1)瞭解員工的工作價值觀及倫理行為之差異；(2)探討工作價值觀與倫理行為之關係；(3)探討個人倫理氣候知覺與倫理行為之關係；(4)分析工作價值觀、個人倫理氣候知覺與倫理行為之關係。    實證部分採用問卷調查法，以目前在企業之工作者為研究對象，共計發放1000份，有效回收問卷為210份，研究結果發現：(1)受訪者在工作價值觀方面普遍都認為是重要的；(2)受訪者在各項不倫理行為的認同程度稍低於平均數；(3)工作價值觀除了外在報酬構面外，皆與倫理行為呈正相關；(4)仁慈導向與原則導向的倫理氣候與倫理行為呈正相關；(5)整體而言，低度利己導向、高度仁慈導向及高度原則導向的倫理氣候類型有助於產生倫理行為。
Recently, the issue of business ethics has widely been talked about. It is not only including the issue of individual morals, but also the influence on the whole organization. The manager should not neglect the importance of business ethics. The issue of business ethics should be put into practice so that it can influence the cognitive of ethical climate and then the behavior of employees. Moreover, as the time goes by, the work goal of people has changed gradually. It has been verified that every generation has their own work values. As a result, this study seeks to investigate the relationship among work values, personal perception of ethical climate and ethical behavior.    On the basis of practical observation and literature review, the first purpose of this study is to find out the differences of work values and ethical behavior in different people. Second, is to understand the relationship between work values and ethical behavior. Third, is to understand the relationship between personal perception of ethical climate and ethical behavior, and the fourth one is to analyze the relationship among work values, personal perception of ethical climate, and ethical behavior.    The empirical survey involved a sample of 210 employees who are at work. First, results showed that generally, employees consider that every dimension of work values is important. Second, the employees slightly do not agree with that unethical behavior. Third, the relationship between work values and ethical behavior is positive, except for the dimension of external rewards. Fourth, the relationship between benevolence and principle ethical climate and ethical behavior is positive.  As a whole, the ethical climate of lower- egoism, higher-benevolence and higher-principle will do well to the ethical behavior.
