工作團隊多元性、團隊衝突對團隊效能影響之研究—以團隊認同為干擾變項
The influence of work team diversity, conflict on team effectiveness - The impact of team identification
團隊多元性、團隊認同、團隊衝突、團隊效能
過去部分文獻顯示團隊多元性可為團隊帶來效益，最終也會提升組織績效；卻亦有文獻指出團隊多元性有損於團隊機能運作，但是無法解釋研究結果分歧的現象。先前研究多為討論團隊多元性造成團隊衝突，進而對於團隊效能的直接和間接影響，並未對團隊認同在團隊運作過程中所扮演的角色加以討論。因此本研究欲更進一步探討團隊認同對團隊多元性、團隊衝突，以及團隊效能之間關係的干擾效果。    本研究針對金融產業發放45個工作團隊、293份個人問卷，回收34個團隊問卷、249份個人問卷；電子產業發放50個團隊、282份個人問卷，回收35個團隊問卷、250份個人問卷，總共回收69個團隊，499份有效問卷。並依據研究目的與問題，採用層級迴歸方式檢驗研究假設，研究結果如下述：1.團隊多元性對團隊衝突正向影響未達顯著程度。2.團隊衝突對團隊效能負向影響未達顯著程度。3.團隊衝突對團隊多元性與團隊效能之間不具有中介效果。4.團隊認同對團隊多元性與團隊衝突之間具有干擾效果。5.團隊認同對團隊衝突與團隊效能之間具有干擾效果。    研究發現亦團隊認同程度越高，使得團隊多元性對團隊衝突正向影響降低，亦減緩團隊衝突對團隊效能的負向影響，進而提升團隊效能。
The empirical literatures examining the performance benefits of team diversity has been equivocal, reporting positive relationships between team diversity and effectiveness in some cases and negative or null relationships in other cases. Past researches have tended to focus on the team diversity which will be associated with higher or lower performance. Although the potential value of team diversity remains clear, a growing body of evidence suggests that organizations frequently find it difficult to realize this contention.    Previous researches have showed that diversity may lead to team conflict and influence team effectiveness directly and indirectly, consequently team conflict plays a role as mediator between team diversity and team effectiveness. Few researches discussed about the role that team identification plays in team interaction. This study exams the impact of team identification in the relations among team diversity, team conflict and team effectiveness.    This study includes 69 teams, and amounts to 499 questionnaires. After analyzing by hierarchical regression analysis, the findings of this study are as follows1.The positive relationship between team diversity and team conflict was not significant.2.The negative relationship between team conflict and team effectiveness was not significant.3.Team conflict does not mediate the relationship between expertise diversity and team performance.4.Team identification moderates the relationship between team diversity and team conflict; the relationship is positive when team identification is low but negative when team identification is high.5.Team identification moderates the relationship between team conflict and team effectiveness; the relationship is negative when team identification is low but positive when team identification is high.    The findings of this study show that team identification will decrease the positive effect of team diversity on team conflict and the negative effect of team conflict on team effectiveness. Findings broaden understanding of the process by which and the conditions under which team diversity may enhance team effectiveness.
