市場基礎的信用風險管理模型之實證研究
An empirical approach using a market-based credit risk management model
風險中立、信用風險溢酬、違約機率、曝險金額
我國即將於2007年逐步實施新巴塞爾資本協定，為呼應該協定設計基本理念，因應三大支柱規範的衝擊，如何發展適合之信用風險模型以作好風險管理及提升資產配置效率，實為本國銀行當前重要課題。   本研究引用之具有風險中立(risk-neutral)評價性質的市場基礎(market-based)模型，在資料來源「內生化」及對未來可進行推估的特性正符合新巴賽爾資本協定的基本精神與規範，可提供估計信用風險溢酬、違約機率、預期損失率、曝險金額等的方法以作為資本計提的基礎。由於不同貸放利率、期間結構、動撥方式均使得銀行承受不同程度的風險，憑藉模型將風險量化評估所酌收之風險溢酬是否合理，據以執行風險定價；而由估計所能容忍違約的機率訂定承受風險的最低標準，則可提供本國銀行未來建立內部評等、擬定授信政策、及授權管理的參考。從個案實證數據可觀察到，隨著回復率的提升，平均信用風險溢酬隨之下降，且下降的幅度有趨快之勢。而在其他條件不變下，基於未來的不確定性，中長期授信平均風險溢酬較短期授信平均風險溢酬為高。因此對於提供優質擔保、借款期限較短的客群，銀行可以相對較低的差別定價以提升業務競爭優勢。另承作放款所隱含的平均違約機率隨著回復率的增加有走高趨勢，意謂所能容忍的違約機率隨著回復率的增加而提高。而隨著回復率的增加，承作放款預期的損失亦隨之下降，則可解釋為當債權保障程度提高時，其預期可能的債權損失將會降低。提醒銀行須重視的是債權保障程度是否實在，即承作當時提供擔保是否鑑價合理、是否依市場行情變化定期檢視修正。
The New Basel Capital Accord will be implemented step by step in the year 2007.To correspond to the basic ideal of such accord as well as to adapt to the Three Pillars concept, it is a very crucial issue for domestic banks in Taiwan to develop an applicable credit risk model to make good risk management and to increase the portfolio investment efficiency.This paper applies a market-based risk neutral model which signifies basic concept and regulations of the New Accord. Using such approach, all estimates will be endogenously forecast. For instance, it can assess risk, probability of default, loss given default, and exposure at default, just to name a few. Due to different loan interest, term structures, and ways to take down loans, banks face various degrees of risk premium. Such approach can help banks quantify risk and thus estimate if risk premium is reasonable before price is determined. By calculating the minimum probability of default, local banks can then establish internal evaluation, regulate credit policies, and authorize management.Empirical evidence shows that as recovery rate rises, average credit risk in premium declines in a rapid pace. Under the condition that everything being equal, mid-term and long-term average credit risks are higher than their short-term counterparts due to future uncertainties. Therefore, to competitiveness, banks can offer relatively low price differentiation to those customers of short-term loans and with more secure guarantee. In addition, as recovery rate increase, average probability of default of loans has a rising tendency; in other words, probability of default that banks can undertake also goes up. However, when recovery rate rises, expected losses of loans drop; in other words, when protection goes up, expected losses of bad debts go down. In conclusion if guarantee is assessed in a reasonable manner or if respective clauses need to be regularly revised in response to market value.
