平衡計分卡於護理人員工作壓力上之應用
Balanced scorecard application for the nursing staff's working pressure
平衡計分卡、護理人員工作壓力、新興傳染疾病
論文摘要內容：本研究目的主要探討北區醫學中心及區域教學醫院護理人員工作壓力之情況，並以平衡計分卡為架構，建立改善護理人員工作壓力之因應之道。研究中蒐集北區某醫學中心及某區域教學醫院護理部門在職護理人員工作壓力來源資料，總共發出問卷1,350份，回收有效問卷1,257份，回收率93.1%。依據研究結果顯示一、護理人員工作壓力量表之信度整體量表Cronbach’ α 值達到0.94。二、工作壓力研究資料中的KMO值為0.95(大於0.5以上) ，因此是適合做因素分析的，P-value小於0.05，先採用主成份抽出因素，再以最大變方法作直交轉軸，結果特徵值大於1的因素共有7個，累積解釋變異量達42.40741%。三、利用因素分析的結果，進行工作壓力及社會支持的集群分析，工作壓力分為3個集群(即高、中、低三個壓力群) 。 社會支持需求亦分為高支持群、中支持群、低支持群三個支持群。分析工作壓力群及社會支持群發現，在高壓力群中社會支持需求是最不滿足的。四、以工作壓力反應的因素分數（factor score）進行集群分析後，進行判別分析，結果正確區別率高達96.65%，而社會支持分群進行判別分析正確區別率達95.86%，可見各群的內部同質性頗高。五、由典型相關研究中可看出當工作壓力愈大，則社會支持需求程度愈大;工作壓力愈大，離職意願也愈高，在統計上皆呈正相關。六、分析結果顯示，高壓力群的護理人員以在醫學中心工作，年齡在25歲以下，已婚者，子女數為一個小孩，年資在1-2年，任職重症單位及門診護理人員，目前職位是護理師者工作壓力較大。筆者試圖以平衡計分卡為架構，建立改善護理人員工作壓力之對策，包括一、顧客構面加強內部顧客的溝通協調能力、建立溝通協調管道、外部提昇與病人及家屬的溝通協調能力、學習溝通技巧、維持良好的醫病關係。二、內部流程構面 作業流程資訊化及標準化、 提供高品質高效率之護理服務流程。三、學習與成長構面 強化專業能力及規劃辦理員工心理健康講座、學習緩解壓力放鬆技巧。四、社會支持構面 善用社會資源(社會服務室) 、成立院內員工關懷協助小組、結合社會資源協助弱勢族群就醫及照護、成立壓力門診。    本研究應用平衡計分卡觀念及架構，建構改善護理人員工作壓力因應之道，以期改善護理人員工作壓力，發揮最高的照護服務。亦希望藉此研究結果可以提供後續研究及管理實務上之參考與應用。
Abstract：The purpose of this research is to discuss the working pressure of nursing staffs at the medical center and regional teaching hospitals in northern Taiwan, and base on balance scorecard to establish ways to improve working pressure of nursing staffs.Source data are collected from the in-service nursing staffs at the nursing departments of one medical center and one regional teaching hospital in North. Total 1,350 questionnaires were issued, with effective return of 1,257 questionnaires and return rate 93.1%. It shows from research result1. Reliability of nursing staff’s working pressure scale Cronbach’ α of the entire scale reaches to 0.94.2. KMO in the research data of working pressure is 0.95 (higher than 0.5), thus it is suitable for factor analysis. P-value<0.05. Adopts principal component factor first, and then use varimax for orthogonal rotation, and there are 7 factors with eigenvalue > 1, and the total variance explained reached to 42.40741%.3. Applying the result of factor analysis to undertake cluster analysis of working pressure and social support, in which the working pressure is divided to three clusters (i.e., high, medium and low pressure clusters). The need of social support also divides to three support groups, namely, high support group, medium support group and low support group. It is discovered from the analysis of working pressure group and social support group that the need of social support in high pressure cluster is the most unsatisfied.4. After the cluster analysis by the factor score of working pressure reaction, the discriminant analysis is applied, and the results show the correct discriminate ratio reaches to 96.65%, and the correct discriminate ratio of the discriminant analysis in social support cluster reaches to 95.86%, thus the inner homogeneous in each cluster is quite high.5. From typical correlation research, it shows when the working pressure is higher, the need of social support is higher; when the working pressure is higher, the desire to leave office is higher, and with positive correlation in statistics.6. It shows from analysis that high pressure group is the nursing staffs work in medical center, aged under 25, married with one child, seniority 1 to 2 years, serve at departments of critical care and outpatient services, and with the post as nurse.The author attempts to use the framework of balanced scoreboard to establish the countermeasure to improve the working pressure of nursing staffs, including1. Customer perspective Enhancing the communication and coordination ability with inner customers, establish communication and coordination channel, improving the communication and coordination ability with patients and their families , learning communication skill and maintaining good physician-patient relationship.2. Internal process perspective E-operation process and standardization, providing high quality and efficiency nursing service process.3. Learning and growth perspective Enhancing specialty ability and plan for psychological health seminar for staffs, learning the skill to release pressure and relax.4. Social support perspective Making good use of social source (Social service office), establishing caring and assistance team for staffs in the hospital, combing social resources to assist disadvantaged minority for medical care, and establishing pressure outpatient services.This research applies the idea and framework of balanced scoreboard to establish was to improve the working pressure of nursing staffs in order to improve their working pressure and develop caring service to the maximum extent. It is also expect to provide the research results as reference and application for follow up researches and management practices.
