建構接納包容班級之行動研究
THE ACTION RESEARCH ON CONSTRUCTING THE STUDENTS IN THE CLASS HAVING THE ABILITIES OF ACCEPTING AND TOLERATING OTHERS
行動研究、身心障礙學生、接納、包容
本研究的主要目的係以行動研究的方式，改進研究者在面對國中七年級新生所面臨的班級經營問題，希望以導師帶領班級團隊學生共同營造一個關懷、接納、包容的學習環境，使特殊學生ㄚ胡能融入班級，也讓班級學生學習與其和諧相處。研究對象主要是以研究者所擔任導師的一個班級，整個研究歷經一年的時間，其中分為醞釀及實踐階段。研究資料的蒐集主要是透過學生文字資料紀錄、觀察紀錄、學生家長及學生的訪談紀錄、會議紀錄以及學校同仁談論紀錄五大部分，資料的分析則是將所有資料加以歸納整理後進行交叉比對分析。    研究結論分為三個部分說明，包括一般同學能以正向情緒看待ㄚ胡，促使班級文化上產生質變、班級活動可有效凝聚向心力，使學生能融入班級生活中，為自己的學習，寫下美好的一頁。本研究對學校行政作為的建議為：主動出擊發覺潛在性的問題、提供有關特殊教育專業知能進修的機會、對社區及家長的宣導；而對推動行動研究者則提出教師的態度為影響研究進行的關鍵、充實特教知能，強化專業知識及接納學生的表現，創造一個支持的環境。關鍵字：行動研究、身心障礙學生、接納、包容
The purpose of the study was to improve and solve the management problems in the class of the seventh grade freshman students in a junior high school.  The researcher as the class advisor expected to construct the students having the abilities of caring, accepting and tolerating others by developing the class teams.  There was a student with leaning disabilities and some psychological problems named “Ya-who” in the class.  He made the class more difficult to manage. However, one of the purposes of the study tended to involve “Ya-who” in the class and let other students to get along with him and learn together.  The study length a year and involved two stages, including the preparing and the implementing stages.  Data were collected by students’ reflections, classroom observations, interviews with students and parents, minutes, as well as discussions with other teachers.  The collected data were cross-analyzed.The results of the study found that the students in the class could have positive emotions toward “Ya-who.”  The class culture had changed in nature.  Class activities could develop class coherence effectively and involve students in their learning.The researcher suggests that the school should discover the hidden problems in advance, provide teachers the opportunities of advancing learning in the knowledge of special education, as well as should educate the parents and community members.  With regard to the teachers who want to do the action research, the attitudes of the teacher were the key factors.  The teacher also needs to enhance his or her knowledge of special education, accept students’ behaviors, and create a supporting class environment.Keywords action research, student with disabilities, acceptance, tolerance
