建立基層行政機關服務品質衡量模式-以臺北市內湖區公所為例
Establishing the Service Quality Measurement Model for the Primary Administrative Organization-A Case Study of Neihu District Office

行政機關
區公所
服務品質
AHP法


本研究以AHP法結合一個整合行政機關與民眾兩者間各種因素的層級架構，完成整個理論調查分析，將使得提高服務品質因素獲得整合性的探討，避免分別探討兩者的結果，就進行結果的整合，可能上合成的偏差，作為未來更深入服務品質研究的新方向。從本研究的調查結果顯示，民眾所認知的服務品質與行政機關所認知的服務品質，兩者仍存在著差異，如何縮短兩者的認知差距，是行政機關應該努力的方向，但一昧地以自我的角度出發，就容易產生偏差形成資源的浪費，行政機關及其決策者應該善用科學的調查方法，經常修正兩者間的差距，才能真正提升服務品質的績效。尤其在政府積極推動組織改造的目標下，流程改造與服務改造更是政府改造的重要關鍵。唯有將顧客導向的服務品質應用於政府部門，才能創造使顧客滿意的政府。本研究以基層行政機關的角度切入以臺北市的區公所為例，發現礙於法令的限制區公所的服務品質必須與市政府的服務品質有互動的關係。因此，本研究認為除了改善現有基層行政機關，對於民眾認知的差距外，以長遠來看，想要提升區公所的服務品質，必須從市政府的組織與作為著手，讓組織扁平化、提升效率、資源共享，才能達到真正的提升服務品質，邁向現代化政府的目標。
This research unites the components of various factors between the administrative organization and the public, which are combined by the AHP method, and it accomplishes the theoretical examination analysis comprehensively; in order to explore the bases of the causes of improving service quality in full. Thus, it should be able to avoid the deviations, which are created by studying the two objects separately and then combining the results afterward. Consequently, it is a more proper aspect for a thorough further research regards the topic of service quality in the future.Base on the results of this study, in the matter of the concepts of service quality, there are some inconsistency between the public and the administrative organization. One of the major tasks for our administrative organization is to shorten the difference of the concepts between the public and the administrative organization; however, if only to proceed the goal from a self concerning angle, it will easily result in wasting the resource. Therefore, the administrative organization and its policymaker should always properly employ scientific investigation method and amend the differences in concepts regarding to the subject of service quality between the public and the administrative organization regularly in order to truly improve it.Procedure reengineering and service reengineering should be the even more crucial for the government administration transformation than the rest factors, especially at the moment when the government plans to give a fresh impetus to organization transformation. Applying the service quality which is qualified under the standard of customer orientation in government departments is the only practicable method to create a customer satisfying government.This research uses one of the administrative organizations in Taipei City to represent the primary administrative organization aspect, which also reveals that the service quality of the administrative is restricted by the Law, and it relates to the interaction between the administrative and the city hall as well. Hence, besides improving the primary administrative in existence and shortening the difference in concepts between the administrative and the public, for the long-term purpose, it has to be started and undertaken form the organizations under the city hall and modified their conducts. Then to flatten the organization, enhance the efficiency, share the resource, and there will be truly achieving the purposes of improving the service quality and striding forward to the goal of a modern government.
