張愛玲小說中書寫服裝寫作策略的探討——以〈金鎖記〉和《怨女》為例
The Study of Writing Strategies on Clothing in Eileen Chang’s ──In the Case of “Jinsuo ji” and Yuan-nü
張愛玲、〈金鎖記〉、《怨女》、書寫服裝、細節描寫、服裝書寫策略、社會論述、作者功能、文本分析、脈絡分析
服裝在人類日常生活中形成了物質、心理、社會結構的文化語言，運用服裝文化語彙做為小說敍事修辭的一部份，是張愛玲作品的一大特色。小說文字細節的內蘊意涵，一方面受內部文章結構安排的牽動連結，一方面受外部時空文化解讀的闡釋影響，寫作過程中，作家須同時處理這內部法則與外部環境的要求。〈金鎖記〉和《怨女》即是張愛玲在兩個創作時期——淪陷上海的傳奇時期與移居美國的「金鎖怨女」改寫時期，面對不同文學與文化傳統，選擇處理相同故事題材與服裝語言系統所發表的作品。以書寫服裝為研究考察點，本論文所欲探討的是：在〈金鎖記〉與《怨女》中，張愛玲採取怎樣的服裝書寫策略以爭取生活於兩個不同文化情境的讀者，其策略改變的意涵與得失如何？從作品創作與讀者詮釋談起，研究架構是結合羅蘭．巴特（Roland Barthes）的寫作理論與小說研究的分析理論，歸納整理而成。在文獻探討的史料與評論基礎上，採取傅科（Michel Foucault）針對作者功能所提出的社會論述觀點，研究運用文本分析與脈絡分析的方法進行分析探索。研究經過作品文本內部，服裝細節的文字技巧、敘事功能，與情節鋪陳的美學架構、寫作視角分析，以及外部時空環境的服裝工具性認知、作家創作的社會目的性與歷史文化情境探討，結果發現：〈金鎖記〉與《怨女》中的服裝細節描寫，反映了民初上海的服裝文化情境，具有標示時間、佈置空間與刻劃人物形象、心理的功能；透過文字技巧與美學構造的安排，服裝書寫的敍事中含藏了作者的文學關懷與論述立場；面對生活在不同文化情境中的讀者，〈金鎖記〉書寫服裝符號互動式的表達，擔任了能言的角色，而《怨女》書寫服裝認知學習式的要求，則呈現為所言的對象。綜合而言，從〈金鎖記〉到《怨女》的文學追尋歷程中，張愛玲在創作上為我們留下了具突破、紀錄與承襲意義的文學遺產，也在翻譯上碰撞出文化交流障礙的課題。
Clothing could be created as a cultural language system formed from the material, psychological, and social structure in human daily life. Using a clothing language to be the narrative rhetoric in her works is a special feature of Eileen Chang’s novels. The connotation of a word or an expression in a fiction would be determined by inner and outer ways the arrangement of the plot could involve in or connect with it from written area, and the interpretation along with traditional scope would influence on it from cultural space. In the process of writing, an author should deal with these two problems in common. “Jinsuo ji” and Yuan- nü are the two works that Eileen Chang had dealt with the same material story and clothing language to confront with the readers coming from different literary and cultural traditions in her two writing periods——“The Legend Period” in occupied Shanghai and “The Rewriting Period for the Rouge of the North” in America. Taking written clothing as a studying subject, this thesis attempted to explore the following questions What writing strategies on clothing in “Jinsuo ji” and Yuan- nü had Eileen Chang used to gain her readers? What were the meanings of the chosen strategies for different societies? And what were the gain and the loss?Starting from the explanation of the process of writing and reading a work, the studying framework was induced by combining the writing theory of Roland Barthes and the interpreting theory of fiction study. Based on the background of literature review, the research was proceeded by the method of textual analysis and contextual analysis under the perspective of author function in social discourse borrowing from Michel Foucault. Through analyzing the techniques and the narrative effects of written clothing and interpreting the esthetic structure and the point of view of the narration in written area, and after exploring the author’s cognition in clothing language function, Eileen Chang’s writing intention to the society and the historical and cultural circumstance from writing context, I had the conclusions as following. The written clothing in “Jinsuo ji” and Yuan- nü reflected the cultural context of clothing in Shanghai during the first half of twenty century, and it pointed the time, assigned the circumstance and depicted the characters’ images and states of minds. The author’s concern and position were concealed in the clothing writing through dealing with the technique and esthetic structure. For the readers being in different traditions, the written clothing in “Jinsuo ji” presented an interactive notation as an expressing role, and that in Yuan- nü demanded coming to comprehend the described object. As to the gain and the loss, Eileen Chang had left her literatures having value in notable creativity and cultural concern and she also remained the task to achieve cultural communication and interaction in Chinese-English translation which was fail in her literary pursuing process from “Jinsuo ji” to Yuan- nü.
