影響服裝產業銷售量預測之因素探討—以童裝為例
The Study of Influence Factors of Sales Forecasting in Apparel Industry-An Application to Children’s Wear
服裝產業銷售量預測、童裝

精確的銷售量預測，除依賴歷史銷售資料及決策者的經驗外，還可依賴銷售量預測的模型；而此預測模型是歐美品牌在銷售管理上常用的工具之ㄧ。銷售量預測的有效模型，端視選擇建構模型中影響銷售量因素的適當與否。由於我國服裝產業業者普遍仍未建構模型中影響銷售量的因素，遂本研究深入探討影響銷售量預測的因素為何。本研究以童裝產業為例，選擇三家市佔率高的童裝業者，與其行銷相關部門主管進行深度訪談，了解各業者對於銷售量預測時所考量的因素與預測的方式為何，及業者對預測的想法。本研究結果依照各業者屬性，分別將其歸類為：精緻流行型、成熟穩健型及積極擴展型三種不同型態的童裝業者，其所共同挑選影響銷售量預測的因素有：「歷史銷售數字」、「國民所得」及「經濟成長率」，其他的影響因素則因各型態業者的通路規模、價格定位以及核心策略不同而有所不同：精緻流行型業者選擇的因素有「展店計劃」、「專櫃坪數」及「專櫃改裝」等；成熟穩健型業者的因素有：「庫存狀況」、「營業目標」、「客單價」及「來客數」等；積極擴展型業者選擇「展店計劃」、「門市地點」、「彼此競爭情況」及「商圈規模」等因素，但對於預測銷售量的方式均以人為判斷為主，其主要來自於業者未知有何適合的的預測軟體及缺乏對銷售量預測的研究，此結果源自於業者採折扣促銷方式出清出貨，再加上大環境資源的限制，因而認為銷售量預測模型的可行性難度高。本研究結果可提供童裝或其他服裝產業業者作為日後建立預測模型之研究基礎，以提高銷售量預測的準確度。
Besides depending on the historical data and managers’ experience, the accurate sales forecast can also depends on the sales forecast model. The model has been one of the tools used for sales management in Europe and America. However, the effectiveness of a sales forecasting model highly relies on if the right sales factors have been used in the model. The apparel industry in Taiwan has not yet found out those influential sales factors and further used them in the sales forecasting model. Therefore this study focused on this issue and tried to find out those affected factors of sales-forecasting.This study took the children’s wear industry for example, and then chose the top 3 companies based on their market shares to interview these companies’ managers who are in the marketing related fields to find out when they forecast the sales, what factors they consider, what models they use, and their opinions about the sales forecast.The study divided children’s wear companies into three types The Bijou, The Centered and The Enlarged all referring to “Historical Data”, “National Income (NI)” and “Economic Growth Rate” as the sales forecasting factors. However, other factors were different according to their scale of channels, prices and core strategies.  “Expanding Plan”, “Shop Area” and “Shop Refit” were preferred factors for The Bijou.  Factors for The Centered were “Stock”, “Goal”, “Price” and “Custom number.”  “Stock”, “Place”, “Competition” and “Scope of Marketplace” were the factors for The Enlarged.  But all the sales forecast were subjective estimation because of the lack of an adaptive program for sales forecast and researches in this field.  It all resulted from that the companies think the sales forecast is not very applicable due to the limitation of resources in this whole business environment as well as they often take discounts as a strategy to clean the stock.At the end, this study provided some fundamental and precious resources for the children’s wear and other apparel industries to create sales forecast models in the future, in the hope to help increase the accuracy of sales forecast for these industries.
