影響線上購物顧客忠誠度因素之研究-以Yahoo!奇摩為例
A Study on Factors Affecting Customer Loyalty of Online Shopping─ A Case study of Yahoo! Kimo Website
顧客關係、服務品質、顧客滿意度、Yahoo!奇摩
網際網路的普及，造就新知識經濟的來臨與電子商務盛行的時代，網路購物的興起，帶動消費者網路購買熱潮。線上購物的優勢在於顧客的高忠誠度以及提供便利的服務不易被傳統購物方式所取代。  本研究的目的是要透過幾個包括顧客關係、服務品質、品牌資產、顧客滿意度及忠誠度構面，去建立一個結合多個變數構成的模式以探討對其線上購物網站的影響，藉此協助購物網站經營者從網路購物服務的角度出發，進而創造其經營服務績效。對於曾在Yahoo!奇摩購物中心網站有購物經驗消費者進行調查，共回收322份問卷，經由SPSS 12.0及AMOS 5.0統計軟體作為本研究之分析工具，經過信度分析、效度分析及結構方程式模型檢定之後，本研究發現：一、顧客關係對於顧客滿意度有正向顯著影響二、服務品質對於顧客滿意度有正向顯著影響三、品牌資產對於顧客滿意度有負向不顯著影響四、顧客滿意度對於顧客忠誠度有正向顯著影響五、顧客關係對於顧客忠誠度有正向顯著影響六、品牌資產對於顧客忠誠度有正向不顯著影響七、服務品質對於顧客忠誠度有負向不顯著影響
The purpose of this research should be concerned through several including customer, service quality , brand assets , customer satisfaction and loyalty literary composition, go to set up one to combine way in which a lot of parameters form in order to probe into the impact on its on-line shopping website, help the operator of shopping website to proceed from angle of the shopping service of the network by this, and then create its operating service performance.  The related references have been reviewed in order to find the basic theories about the paper. In addtion, some experience consumers who got into Yahoo! Kimo websites of shopping center go shopping, and finally this paper got 322 returns in total. SPSS 12.0 and AMOS 5.0 will be the analysis tools in the paper. After reliability analysis, validity analysis and structural equation modeling, there are there findings about the research1.Customer Relationship has a significant positive effect on Customer satisfaction.2.Service quality has a significant positive effect on Customer satisfaction.3.Brand assets has a significant negative effect on Customer satisfaction.4.Customer satisfaction has a significant positive effect on Customer loyalty.5.Customer Relationship has a significant positive effect on Customer loyalty.6.Brand assets has a significant negative effect on Customer loyalty.7.Service quality has a significant negative effect on Customer loyalty.
