從人壽保險業保單製作探討企業創新採用策略之研究
A Study of Firm's Innovation Adoption Strategy Based on life Insurance Policy Generation.
創新採用策略、績效、人壽保險

台灣人壽保險產業競爭相當激烈，沿之已久的傳統作為已無法持續為企業帶來績效，也無法保持企業領先的地位。過去的文獻指出，此時瞭解企業本身與產業競爭者間的優劣勢，導入創新的作法及思維，將可帶給企業一個改變遊戲規則的契機。目前各保險公司紛紛採用及導入保單製作系統，以降低成本或提昇公司競爭力，本研究希望深入探討保險公司保單製作系統的採用策略，並且希望了解各保險公司導入創新後的狀況。研究結果顯示人壽保險企業在創新的接受能力、導入目的及績效要求、競爭的策略思維上，均會受到該企業之於整體產業的市場規模及地位、企業資源能力及運作執行效率等之左右，導致對企業導入創新後的影響有所不同。本研究以科技接受理論、高科技創新接受度之技術採用週期模型和破壞性創新理論等，比較及檢驗研究之相關發現，研究結果建議未來應考慮企業於創新採用時「風險承受能力」及「成本節約效益」兩個重要的因子。本研究提供保險業未來導入創新的參考，也提供創新提供者選擇導入公司的參考，也提供創新理論研究者兩個新的考慮因素，讓未來的研究者可以做更深入及全面的探索。
In Taiwan, the competition of insurance industry is very vigorous. The films can not keep on to grow and the leading position by relying on past experiences and behaviors. According to the literature, the films should analyze and find out their own competitive advantages and disadvantages compared to competitors. To adopt innovations firm will be able to gain the new opportunities to change rules of the game.Many insurance films adopted new policy generation systems to reduce the cost and enhance their competitive advantages. The goal of the research is to explore the innovation adoption strategies of these films in the insurance industry and results of innovation adoption.The results show that the adoption capability, goal of adoption, performance requirement are different among these films base on their economic scale of the market share, the efficiency of execution, the capability of resource arrangement. This study inspects results based on Technology Acceptance Model, Technology Adoption Life Cycle theory and Disruptive Innovation Model. This study suggests that two extra major factors should be considered “the capability of risk taken” and “the degree of cost saving”.The research provides a reference for firms to adopt innovations. It also provides a guideline for innovation providers. For innovation adoption researchers, this study provides two extra factors on innovation adoption.  They can incorporate these factors into their research and further investigate these factors.
