應用模擬情境於ERP教育訓練之研究－使用服務導向架構
A Study on the Application of Simulated Environment to ERP Training－－Use Service-Oriented Architecture
企業資源規劃、模擬情境教學、服務導向架構（SOA）
企業在導入ERP 系統及推動電子化過程中，技術、作業流程與人員將隨之改變，而人員抗拒往往是變革的一大障礙。抗拒的原因包括需要再學習新的工具、不瞭解導入ERP系統的好處、需適應組織新的工作流程、擔心自己被裁員等。所以若能有一套良好的ERP教育訓練方法，對於尚未建置ERP的企業，將能減少使用人員的抗拒心理，提高ERP教育訓練效果，進一步幫助組織建置ERP系統；對於已建置ERP的組織，一套良好的ERP教育訓練方法，可協助新進人員短時間內熟悉ERP系統，認知ERP系統對於企業的重要性，讓新進人員在面對真實的企業環境時，能正確地判斷環境問題再操作ERP系統，減少因錯誤判斷而造成的組織損失，比方安全庫存、採購量的多寡、產能的監控等等。本研究希望改善傳統的ERP教育訓練方式，以協助ERP新進使用者得到良好的訓練。    本研究提出的改進ERP教育訓練的方法是設計一情境模擬軟體來輔助ERP教育訓練，本軟體的建置是以寶盛公司SOA架構為主要發展平台，著重在買賣業的行為事件，情境軟體模擬顧客下訂單和供應商出貨的事件，由使用者操作ERP系統滿足訂單的需求，並考量毛利、庫存成本、早交成本、遲交成本及採購成本對於企業營運績效的影響，情境模擬軟體包含訂單產生、產生出貨單與計分系統，利用模擬軟體產生顧客和供應商的行為事件，受訓者透過操作ERP系統和行為事件產生互動，熟悉企業流程和ERP系統的使用，並提昇決策的能力和認知ERP與企業工作流程的相關性。希望藉由模擬情境方式提昇ERP使用者的教育效果。    本研究利用實驗法來證實運用情境模擬教學方式將有助於ERP教育訓練，讓ERP受訓練者不僅熟悉ERP的介面、指令，更進一步加深瞭解企業程序對於公司營運的影響。
Employees’ resistance often causes a hinder when implementing ERP (enterprise resources planning) systems. The reasons of resistance may be that  the employees are afraid of learning new tools or are reluctant to change the workflow. If there is a good way of ERP training, which can reduce employees’ resistance or improve training effects, then it will help employees be familiar with ERP system in a short time and make a good policy such as safety stocks, purchase quantities, etc. when encountering problems.    This research is to improve traditional ERP training. We propose to design a simulating environment software to improve ERP training. The development of the simulating environment software uses service-oriented architecture (SOA) provided by Lancer Corporation. The simulating environment software is designed for trading companies. It simulates the events of customers and suppliers. The ERP trainees use ERP system to respond to the events generated by the simulating environment software. The software generates sales orders from the customers and shipping orders from the suppliers, and calculates performance including gross profit, inventory cost, early delivery cost, late delivery cost, and purchase ordering cost. The ERP trainees learn business processes and improve decision making ability through using ERP system to solve the problems caused by the simulated events.    We conducted an experiment to verify that the simulating environment is useful for ERP training. After the experiment, the ERP trainees not only are familiar with the commands and interfaces of the ERP system, but also learn the impacts of the business processes on the organization
