應用資料採礦技術探討臺灣地區企業技術創新結構之研究應用資料採礦技術探討臺灣地區企業技術創新結構之研究應用資料採礦技術探討台灣地區企業技術創新結構之研究
The Research of Enterprises' Technology Innovation Structure in Taiwan with Data Mining Technology
競爭力、技術創新、資料採礦

面對全球競爭的壓力以及知識經濟的時代，技術創新的能力便是企業維持競爭力的關鍵，卓越的技術創新能力能將知識轉換成產品或服務上的價值，因此，技術創新能力的提升便是國內企業所欲發展的重點。國際間在90年代開始進進行區域性的創新調查，我國也在2001年規劃技術創新調查的細節，本研究以「臺灣地區技術創新調查(2002-2005)」為研究範圍，利用資料採礦技術針對臺灣地區企業部署技術創新的情形，作一結構性的探討，並試圖找出企業執行技術創新活動的條件與因素。研究結果顯示，製造業的企業在技術創新活動中，較注重製程上的更新，其資訊來源以生產面因素為主，而技術創新經費較多配置在公司內部的研發與產品設計；服務業則著重產品在市場的區隔，並從公開流動的外在因素取得資訊，而技術創新經費較多花費在從外部取得技術與人員培訓。技術創新活動較活躍的企業，資訊化的特徵較明顯，通常也執行管理、行銷等其他創新活動。對於技術創新的成果，技術創新活動較活躍的企業會採取較多的專利申請或複雜設計來保護。
Facing the pressure of global competition and the time of knowledge economy, the ability of technology innovation is a main key to maintain competitiveness for enterprises. The knowledge can be transformed to the practical values by excellent ability of technology innovation. Therefore, improving the ability of technology innovation is the focal point that enterprises want to develop in Taiwan.  The regional innovation survey was beginning in 90’s with some nations. Also there were some details of the plan about survey of technology innovation in 2001 in Taiwan. 「Taiwan Technology Innovation Survey」 is the researching ambit of this study. Focus directly at the situation enterprises allocated technology innovation activities, and try to find out the conditions and factors of executing these activities with data mining technology.  The results of research show that when enterprises in manufacture allocated technology innovation activities, they emphasized the update of their procedure. And enterprises in manufacture usually got innovation information from their production line, their main cost of technology innovation activities were R&D tasks and the design of the products inside of the companies. On the other hand, when enterprises in service industry allocated technology innovation activities, they emphasized their product segment in the market. And enterprises in service industry usually got innovation information from the public messages, their main cost of technology innovation activities were getting new technology and employees training. Those enterprises with better technology innovation activities usually had the characteristic of e-commerce. Furthermore, they also executed management innovation, marketing innovation and so on. About those results of technology innovation activities, they always protected them with more measures, like the patent or complex design.
