應用在財務預測上的混合式模糊類神經網路
A Merged Fuzzy Neural Network and Its Application to Financial Prediction
模糊類神經網路、基因演算法、股票預測

本論文結合了BMF的模糊類神經網路及簡化型基因演算法，針對台灣股價指數進行套利的預測。利用簡化型基因演算法不僅能有效搜尋多參數問題的最佳解，還能加快運算的時間。其中，為了解決傳統類神經網路在輸入變數增加時會產生大量的權重參數以致於耗費大量運算時間甚至造成電腦無法運算的問題，我們使用了數個模糊類神經網路來達成階層式的學習架構，並將其稱之為「混合式的模糊類神經網路」。混合式模糊類神經網路的學習機制是藉由B-spline函數做為可區域調整之歸屬函數，並結合循序搜尋的簡化型基因演算法來調整網路的權重值以及BMF的控制點，來達成我們所預測的目標。最後我們使用了兩個範例來做驗證：範例一為使用民國87年1月至88年6月的台股資料來訓練類神經網路，並預測88年7月至88年8月之台股指數的漲跌；範例二是使用民國90年1月至90年9月的台股資料來訓練類神經網路。其中的網路訓練方式是使用移動學習的方法去做訓練，並預測90年10月之台股指數的漲跌，得到了相當好的效果。
This research aims at the study of the Taiwan’s stock market index future carrying out the interest arbitrage with combination of a BMF fuzzy neural network and reduced-form genetic algorithm. It can not only get optimal solution on searching vast parameters, but also speed up computational time. Furthermore, when the input number of the traditional neural network increases, it leads to the problem of consuming a large amount of computational time and even causes computer unable to operate. Hence, we propose a novel structure, called a Merged-FNN, which is combined with a number of small fuzzy neural networks to solve this problem. In the Merged-FNN, we adopt B-spline curves as the membership functions for fuzzy neural networks because of the property of local tuning, and use a sequential-search-based crossover point (SSCP) to adjust both the weights of fuzzy neural networks and the control points of BMF to achieve the desired object. We used two examples to prove finally，One example is uses the data of Taiwan stock index from January 1998 to June 1999 to train the neural network, and forecasts the price fluctuation of Taiwan stock index from July 1999 to August 1999.Another one is used the data of Taiwan stock index from January 2000 to September 2000 to train the neural network , in which the network is trained by using moving learning, and forecasts the price fluctuation of Taiwan stock index from October 2000 . The simulation results confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method.
