應用遺傳演算法與動態模糊化調整策略於指數型基金商品設計之研究－以台灣50指數為例
Applying Genetic Algorithms and Dynamically Fuzzified Adjusting Strategies to Designing of Index Fund Based on Taiwan 50 Index
指數型基金、遺傳演算法、模糊理論

近年來股市漲跌不定，不少主動式管理基金投資績效不如預期，讓投資績效呈現穩定成長的被動式管理基金異軍崛起，成為市場寵兒。其基金之操作策略，原則上，儘可能複製標的指數，使績效與標的指數一致，而不要求基金的投資組合打敗大盤，捨棄大起大落的表現，以追求穩建的績效為目的。但實務上要完全追蹤指數有一定的難度；以台灣加權股價指數為例，其成份股並不固定，且部份成份股流動性不佳；若要完全按照加權股價指數成份股的權重來建構投資組合，將會造成管理上的負擔。因此在衡量追蹤成本、追蹤誤差及作業風險等因素後，通常運用選擇樣本複製的方式為其主要資產管理方式。所以從實務上來看，以較少的投資標的數，取得與指數最大的連動性；並以簡便的方式，快速找出績效能貼近於大盤指數的投資組合是十分重要的。本研究應用遺傳演算法（GA）來建構指數型基金的投資組合，並結合動態的模糊化調整策略，期望使指數型基金的淨值成長能夠更有效地趨近於標的指數的績效。本研究有五個主要的結論：（1）遺傳演算法的確能找出追蹤績效不錯的投資組合，且較長天數訓練期其追蹤效果會更為穩定。（2）只要時間拉長到大約一整年，若再不調整投資組合，則有效追蹤指數的機率將會明顯降低。（3）搭配模糊調整策略後，其追蹤績效雖不見得能提升。但長期來看，其追蹤績效能較無搭配模糊調整策略的結果，來得較為穩定。（4）調整投資組合的次數不可過於頻繁，其所產生的交易成本，將會嚴重影響追蹤績效。（5）簡化調整規則後能使交易次數有效地減少，並提升追蹤績效。
Because of undergoing many ups and downs in the stock market these years, the performance of active management fund is not as good as expected. Therefore, passive management fund has become a new force suddenly coming to the fore. Managers of passive funds construct a portfolio that replicates the constituents of a chosen market index. The target of passively managed funds is not to outperform the index, but keep the performance as well as index.In practice, it is difficult to replicate the index fully. Take The Taiwan Stock Exchange Capitalization Weighted Stock Index （TAIEX） for example, the constituents are constantly changing, and some constituents do not have good liquidity. If we fully construct a portfolio according to the weight of TAIEX, it will cause the managerial burden. After weighing the factor of tracking cost, tracking error and operating risk etc, it usually uses the way of sample replication to be the main assets management strategy. So, in practice, it’s important to quickly find out portfolio in a convenient way, make sure the performance of that is close to index, and make most interrelationship with index by less constituents.This research constructs the index tracking portfolio by genetic algorithm （GA） and combines dynamically fuzzified adjusting strategies, and wishes to make the performance of index fund more close to the index. There are five conclusions in this research （1） GA does find out the portfolio with good tracking performance. And the more days of training, the more stable in tracking performance. （2） The probability of effective tracking index will be obviously reduced, as long as the tracking is postponed to a whole year and does not adjust the portfolio. （3） The tracking performance may not be able to be improved after combining dynamically fuzzified adjusting strategies. But in long terms, it’s more stable than that without combining. （4） The times of adjusting portfolio can't be too much. It will produce much transaction cost and affect the performance of tracking seriously. （5） After simplifying the rule of adjusting, it can make the times of the trade reduced effectively and improve the performance of tracking.
