成年子女的孝道責任與焦慮：親子關係與父母需求的影響
Filial obligation and anxiety of adult children Effects of parents-child relationship and parental need
孝道責任、孝道焦慮、親子關係、父母需求

　　本研究主要在探討成年子女的孝道責任與焦慮，瞭解親子關係與父母需求對孝道焦慮的影響，並進一步探求親子關係與父母需求是否會影響到孝道責任與焦慮間的關係。取樣對象以台北縣、台北市、桃園縣（市）30歲至40歲，父母至少一方仍健在之已婚成年子女。回收有效問卷400份。　　研究結果發現：　　（一）女性在孝道情感焦慮上，高於男性，意即女性對於父母步入老年有較多的擔心。與父母同住者，孝道責任較高。父母之經濟資源較差者，子女的孝道能力焦慮較高，也就是說子女會對於自己是否有能力盡孝感到擔心。手足數及父母之健康狀況對於子女的孝道責任和焦慮並無影響。（二）孝道責任愈高，孝道能力焦慮愈低，但孝道情感焦慮愈高。這代表了，愈覺得孝順父母是自己應盡責任的人，對自己盡孝能力的擔心較低，但他們對於父母步入老年日漸衰老會有較多的擔心。（三）孝道情感焦慮隨著親子關係滿意度的增加而提高，但孝道能力焦慮卻會降低，即使在孝道責任高之情形下，親子間的幸福和滿意感受，也能降低孝道能力焦慮。（四）父母所需子女協助的程度愈高，子女之孝道焦慮也愈高，但父母需求並不會增加或減少了因孝道責任所產生的孝道焦慮。
The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship between filial obligation and anxiety of adult children. It also attempts to explore the effects of parent-child relationship and parental need on filial anxiety as well as on the relationship between filial obligation and anxiety. The subjects of the research are married children living in Taipei and Taoyuan city, aged thirty to forty, with at least one parent still alive. Four hundred valid subjects are recruited in this study. The results of this study indicate the following 1.Women have stronger filial anxiety over their aging parent’s well-being than men. Adult children living with parent have stronger sense of filial obligation than those who do not live with parent. Adult children have more anxiety over their own ability to perform their filial obligation if their parents lack financial resources. The number of siblings as well as parent’s health status has no significant effect on adult children’s filial obligation and anxiety. 2.For adult children, the stronger their sense of filial obligation is, the less anxiety over their abilities to perform their obligation will be. But they have more anxiety over their aging parent’s well-being. 3.Adult children’s anxiety over their aging parent’s well-being goes together with the satisfaction of parent-child relationship, but anxiety over their ability to perform filial obligation decreases when the parent-child relationship is satisfactory. When adult children’s sense of filial obligation is strong, the satisfaction of parent-child relationship decreases the anxiety over their ability to perform filial obligation. 4.The degree of parental need goes together with adult children’s filial anxiety .On the other hand, the parental need has no effect on the children’s sense of filial anxiety resulted from their sense of filial obligation.
