我國女子籃球選手知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力研究
A Study of Leadership Behavior and Team Cohesion of Women Basketball Team
教練領導行為、團隊凝聚力
摘  要本研究主要在瞭解我國女子籃球選手知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力間之關係。研究對象為117名國內女子籃球選手，並以「我國女子籃球選手教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力量表」為研究工具進行調查。結果發現如下：一、  不同運動頻率之國內女子籃球選手知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力，毎週「2-3天」高於「6天以上」達顯著。二、  球齡「8-9年」的選手在團隊凝聚力得分顯著高於「6-7年」的選手。在「團隊人際關係」中「全運級」選手高於「國家級」選手且達顯著性。「團隊目標達成」、「團隊合作默契」「2-3天 週」高於「4-5天 週」並達顯著。三、  知覺教練領導行為與團隊凝聚力，在「團隊目標達成」、「團隊合作默契」「2-3天 週」高於「4-5天 週」達顯著性。大專組在「訓練指導行為」、「社會支持行為」、「獎勵行為」均達顯著。整體在「訓練指導行為」、「社會支持行為」、「獎勵行為」均達顯著性。關鍵詞：教練領導行為、團隊凝聚力論文總頁數：137頁
AbstractA study of the perception for women basketball players on the leadership behavior of coaches and their team cohesion.This study aimed at the understanding of women basketball players’ perception on their team cohesion and the leadership behavior of coaches.   The target was a group of 117 Taiwanese women basketball players.  A “Quantified Table of Team Cohesion and Leadership Behavior of Coaches for Taiwanese Women Basketball Players” was employed as the survey tool for this study.  The results are as follows1.  The perception on the team cohesion and the leadership behavior of coaches for players having practice frequency 2~3 days per week was obviously stronger than those having 6 days or more practice a week.2.  The quantified scores on the team cohesion for players having 8~9 years’ sports life was higher than those having 6~7 years’ sports life; team interpersonal relationship was obviously stronger for the formers as well.  For the same relationship, players attending national competition have higher quantified scores than those in national teams.  Whereas in the categories of team goal achievement and team cooperation understanding, players with 8~9 years’ sports life having practice frequency 2~3 days per week was obviously stronger than those having 4~5 days practice a week.3.  The perception on the leadership behavior of coaches for players is related to the team cohesion, players having practice frequency 2~3 days per week was obviously stronger than those having 4~5 days practice a week in the categories of team goal achievement and team cooperation understanding.  College players were obviously stronger in the sense of coach instruction behavior, concern behavior and encouragement behavior.  The overall study group was shown an obviously strong sense in the categories of coach instruction behavior, concern behavior and encouragement behavior.
