承銷方式,公司特性與IPO折價之研究
Underwriting mechanisms, offering firms’ characteristics and underpricing of IPO firms
承銷方式、公司特性、IPO、初次公開發行、折價幅度
摘要論文名稱：承銷方式、公司特性與IPO折價之研究校（院）系所組別：輔仁大學管理學研究所碩士班研究生：鄧櫻菽　指導教授：吳桂燕 博士　論文頁數：124論文提要內容：　　為使承銷制度更具市場效率性與公平性，進而提升國際化與自由化程度。台灣於2005年新制改革，發行公司可以依照公司本身特性或條件，自由選擇公開申購、競價拍賣或詢價圈購三種承銷方式。承銷方式、公司特性與IPO 折價幅度三者之間存在何種關聯性呢？本研究認為IPO公司為賺取正異常報酬以使折價幅度增加，因此會選擇有利於折價幅度增加之承銷方式，而由於採競價拍賣之IPO折價幅度較小，因此大多數發行公司仍不普遍使用。其次，不同公司特性或不同承銷方式亦會影響承銷配售方式之選擇及IPO折價幅度。最後，進一步解釋IPO個別公司特性是否會透過承銷方式以增加對IPO折價幅度之解釋，以便能深入分析影響IPO折價幅度之原因。　　本研究以1985年至2005間初次上市公司共411家作為研究對象，實證結果如下：一、由於競價拍賣制之承銷價格是由競標方式產生，因而較接近市場價格，故折價幅度較採用純公開申購制小。二、以新制樣本分析，影響承銷配售方式選擇之特性有：承銷價格、承銷規模、中籤率、經營績效、EPS、董監持股比、電子業、(P V)Sales。三、影響折價幅度之特性有：承銷方式、承銷價格、中籤率、成立年限、公司規模（股本、總資產）、經營績效、EPS、電子業。而新舊承銷制度亦會影響折價幅度。四、公司特性無法透過承銷方式加強對IPO折價幅度之解釋。
AbstractTitle of Thesis Underwriting mechanisms, offering firms’ characteristics and underpricing of IPO firms.Name of Institute Graduate Institute of Management Fu Jen Catholic UniversityName of Student Ying-Shu Deng                 Advisor Dr. Kuei-Yen WuTotal Page124AbstractTo improve underwriting mechanisms more efficiently and fairly, underwriting mechanisms in Taiwan have reformed since 1995, offering firms can choose all kinds of underwriting mechanisms, including fixed-price, auction and book building, depending on their conditions or characteristics. However, what kind of relations exist among underwriting mechanisms, offering firms’ characteristics and underpricing of IPO firms?  By investigating  411 IPOs in Taiwan equity market during the period from 1985 to 2005, the empirical result show that underpricing is smaller with auction than that with fixed price underwriting. Besides, some of the offering firms’ characteristics are related with the degree of underpricing. In addition, underwriting mechanisms are affected by the firms’ characteristics, such as offering price, offering size, rate of drawing, years prior to IPO, size, operating performance, EPS and industry. Finally, I examine each of the offering firms’ characteristics via underpricing mechanism to test if they can increase the explanatory power of underpricing. The result rejects the above hypothesis.
