捷運站週邊社區街道人行環境改善之探討及設計--以新莊中華路一段為例
A Study and Design on the Improvement of Pedestrian Environment on Community Streets around MRT Station--“Section One of Zhonghua Road, Sinjhuang City” as an example
街道、人本、人行環境、大眾運輸系統、環境行為觀察
隨著現代都市交通建設的發展，便利的車行環境雖帶來無限的商機，卻也嚴重威脅到人行環境的品質。台灣近年所針對的開放空間改善計畫多以點狀、線狀與塊狀為主，如公園綠地、老街再造等。而網狀的開放空間，也就是街道空間與人行環境之改造，卻因為主管機關過於複雜，遲遲無法落實。根據調查，一般都市有40%為開放空間，其中有80%為街道，由此可知街道品質對於人行環境的影響與重要性。    本研究之背景在於地方交通重心的轉移，新莊台一省道中正路與週邊道路更新的契機出現；大眾捷運系統的進入，步行人潮的湧現；捷運站帶動都市週邊環境的更新與活絡。在以上都市涵構的前提下，本研究之總目標企圖以人本的觀念提出都市街道的改造構想，創造適居性街道空間。再者，本研究選擇捷運新莊線新莊站旁，直交於中正路之中華路一段為研究對象，研究目的如下：1.檢視新莊中華路一段人行環境與使用行為間之落差2.探討新莊中華路一段行人與其他道路使用者間之衝突與互動3.探討國內外捷運站週邊街道人行環境設計之優良案例4.提出新莊中華路一段人行環境改造之街道設計方案    本研究之文獻回顧歸納出適合台灣街道改善的資料，整理可供改善設計之概念，同時以新莊中華路一段作為探討，進行實地觀察與分析。本研究以下列三種方法進行：1.依據問卷調查與住民訪談來反應當地居民對街道現況的態度，並提出對於街道改善的期望。2.配合國內捷運站與國外街道成功案例的分析，歸納出未來街道改善的可行做法，利於街道空間改善時的推動。3.運用直接觀察法與影像紀錄法進行環境行為觀察，發現與探討街道環境存在的問題與行人行為模式，真實的瞭解現況街道人行空間存在的議題。    設計操作將研究分析之結果反應於設計項目擬定上，並搭配(1)道路寬度、(2)道路定線與(3)行人跳島三項設計重點，分項提出六種操作可能，再經由逐項評估選擇最終操作設計，並以模型製作與電腦輔助設計圖說作為成果之呈現；研究成果將提供新莊市公所作為未來規劃改善之參考，並作為捷運沿線同性質街道空間改善計畫之範例。
The development of modern urban transportation, although introduces great opportunity by the convenience of traffic network, has seriously threatened the quality of pedestrian environment. Taiwan has made great efforts in improving pieced and linear open space such as parks and old streets in recent years. However, the improvement of street and pedestrian environment is under developed for long time. According to investigation, the urban area includes 40% open space and 80% of open space is street. Therefore it is understandable that how the quality of street has great effect on the quality of a city.The background of the present research lies in shifting of local traffic center, the turning point appeared when the provincial road and the peripheral streets have renewed; The coming of MRT will introduce flow of pedestrians; the MRT station will stimulate a better and livable urban peripheral environment. Under the above background, the present research attempts to highlight pedestrian to propose the urban street design concept in order to create livable street environment. The aims of the research as follows1.To examine the incompatibility between the walking behaviors and the pedestrian environment of the studied street.2.To evaluate conflicts and interactions between pedestrian and other road users of the studied street.3.To investigate case studies of pedestrian environment on both foreign and domestic context around the MRT station.4.To propose street design alternatives for the redevelopment of pedestrian environment on the studied street.The literature review of the research introduces applicable information and concept for street development in Taiwan. The present research selects “Section One of Zhonghua Road, Sinjhuang City” as the case study to proceed observation and analysis. The present research implements the following three methods：1.According to the questionnaire and interview of resident to respond to the real situation of the resident on the present street, and propose their expectation of the street environment.2.To utilize analysis of the foreign and domestic good practice of street redevelopment to induce the elements for future street improvement.3.To apply direct observation and image record to implement Environment Behavior Studies, to discover and discuss the issue of pedestrian environment on street.Design process utilize results of the empirical study and correspond to the following three design elements：(1) street width, (2) alignment of road and (3) pedestrian island. Alternatives are evaluated to develop final proposal. The presentation utilizes physical model and Computer-Aided Architecture Design drawings. The outcome of the present research will provide Sinjhuang City government as reference for future improvement of streets.
