探討負面口碑傳播與消費者轉換意願之關係
Research on the Relevance between Negative Word-of-Mouth and Consumer Switching Intention
負面口碑傳播、品牌態度、顧客滿意度、個人涉入程度
論文題目：探討負面口碑傳播與消費者轉換意願之關係校(院)系所組別：輔仁大學管理學研究所碩士班研究生：林建宏   指導教授：榮泰生 博士    論文頁數：77論文摘要內容：在現今競爭激烈的環境下，消費者的轉換行為對業者而言是具有相當影響力的。對於新進入的廠商來說，必須使既有廠商的顧客產生轉換意願，進而產生轉換行為才能在市場上占有一席之地，而對於現有的廠商而言，則必須防範消費者的轉換行為，因此瞭解引起消費者轉換意願之因素是相當重要的。影響消費者轉換意願之因素甚多，而本研究則著重於負面訊息影響的部份。負面口碑傳播意指當消費者有不滿意的購物經驗或者是對某項產品服務有著不好的使用感覺時，甚至於不再使用的經驗發生時，而將這種不好的經驗告訴親朋好友，並建議他人不要使用此產品的過程。本研究探討負面訊息強度、傳播者專業與關係強度對於消費者轉換意願的影響，並加入品牌態度、顧客滿意度與個人涉入程度作為干擾變數加以討論，探討三個干擾變數是否會對負面口碑所造成的負面效果產生干擾效果。研究結果發現負面訊息強度與關係強度皆會使消費者產生轉換意願行為；傳播者專業程度越高，對消費者轉換意願並沒有顯著影響。在干擾變數方面，個人涉入程度會對負面口碑所產生的負面效果進行干擾；而品牌態度與顧客滿意度則會對消費者轉換意願產生負向的影響。關鍵詞：負面口碑傳播、品牌態度、顧客滿意度、個人涉入程度
Title of Thesis Research on the relevance between negative word-of-mouth and consumer switching intentionName of Institute Graduate Institute of Management Fu Jen Catholic UniversityName of Student Chien-Hung Lin          Advisor Dr. Tai-Sheng JungTotal Page 77AbstractIn today’s market where competition is increasingly fierce, the consumer switching behavior has become highly significant to businesses. For market newcomers, the task at hand is to initiate a switching intention among the consumers of the incumbent businesses and to further switch consumer behavior to gain a share of the market. As for the incumbent, preventing consumer switching behavior is certainly a top priority. Therefore, identifying the factors that could possibly lead to consumer switching intention is of utmost importance. It is evident that there are various elements that may cause switching intention. This study, however, focuses on the so-called “negative word-of-mouth.” Negative word-of-mouth refers to consumers’ complaints over their dissatisfaction with certain negative shopping experiences, products or services. Negative word-of-mouth comes into play when consumers share their experience of dissatisfaction with their friends and relatives, telling them not to purchase certain products and services.This study discusses the intensity of negative messages and the professionalism and intensity of relationship of the “message sender” on consumer switching intention. Brand attitude, consumer satisfaction and personal involvement are included to serve as moderating variables. The aim is to see whether or not these three variables moderate the negative effect created by negative word-of-mouth.The result of the study shows that both the intensity of negative messages and the intensity of relationship result in consumer switching intention and behavior. The level of professionalism of the message sender, however, does not play a significant role. In terms of variables, personal involvement moderates the negative effect of negative word-of-mouth while brand attitude and customer satisfaction have a negative influence on consumer switching intention.Keywords：negative word-of-mouth、Brand attitude、consumer satisfaction、personal involvement
