提升免疫調節的營養補充品--以紫錐花為例(綜論)
Dietary Supplement of Immunmodulation--Echinacea(A Review)
膳食補充劑、紫錐花萃取物、免疫調節
紫錐花萃取物 (Echinacea Extract, EE) 是被廣泛使用的植物藥草，1994年美國膳食補充劑健康與教育法 (Dietary Supplements Health and Education Act，DSHEA) 明確的將草本植物列為營養補充劑；另外在植物藥草發達的德國，紫錐花萃取物是一普遍為醫師用於治療感冒的處方用藥，近年實驗亦證實紫錐花萃取物具免疫調節之能力。研究已知的紫錐花活性成份包括類黃酮 (flavonoids)、多醣體(ploy- saccharides)、烷醯胺(alkylamide)、聚乙炔 (polyacetylenes)、以及如咖啡酸衍生物 (caffeic acid derivatives)等多酚化合物 (polyphenol)，其對免疫細胞的影響如刺激白血球的吞噬作用、強化自然殺手細胞之毒殺能力、調節細胞激素之分泌、促進抗體生成之免疫調節功效和清除自由基之作用。至目前為止，紫錐花萃取物被視為具高度安全性的植物藥草，副作用並不常見且輕微。本篇論文將近年有關紫錐花萃取物的科學報告及醫學臨床實驗作系統之整理，期望本篇綜論對於想要開發具免疫調節功效之草本植物或是植物性化合物(phyto- chemicals) 為營養補充品之研發人員，亦或是從事營養諮詢的人員有所助益。
Echinacea extract (EE) is widely known to be used as herbal medicine. According to the Dietary Supplements Health and Education Act (DSHEA) in 1994, it clearly classified botanicals as dietary supplement. Also in Germany, a country known to be well-advanced in phytomedicine research, Echinacea has already been highly recommended by doctors to be used as a common prescription to treat cold. Furthermore, recent studies have proven Echinacea can function as an extracting tool to provide immune-modulating potency. Studies have also discovered  the active components of Echinacea including flavonoids, polysacchardes, alkylamide, polyphenols, caffeic acid derivatives , ployphenol and so on,which play beneficial roles on regulating   the immune system. Many documents supported that Echinacea can activate the phagocttotic activity of phagocytes,enhancing the cytotoxicity of NK cells,modulating the secreting pattern of cytokine,promote the production of antibodies and also on scavenging free radical. Today,Echinacea is considerede as safest form of herbal medicines with only very minor side effect.This thesis will summarize the most recent scientific reports and  clinical studies regarding Echinacea.  The goal is to provide insights and benefit those who are interested in the further development in the area of herbal botanical and its effect on immunmodulating potency, researchers who are pursuing in the area of phytochemicals as nutrition supplement, dieticians, or nutrition consultants.
