擔保債權憑證之評價-FitchVECTOR模型與GaussianCopula法之應用與比較
Pricing Collateralized Debt Obligation - A comparison of Fitch VECTOR model and Gaussian Copula approach
擔保債權憑證、分券、常態Copula函數、惠譽VECTOR模型
本文主要應用Gaussian Copula模型及結構式Fitch VECTOR信用風險模型探討CDO證券化中各分券之評價，首先我們必須利用該兩模型估算證券化資產池中的聯合損失機率分配函數，並進行分券設計，其中Gaussian Copula模型透過程式的撰寫運算分析得到信用風險機率及損失分配，而Fitch VECTOR模型則是應用Fitch所建立的整合資料庫商業程式化的簡易模型，透過這兩模型的應用，我們計算損失機率分配及相關變數，運用信用交換的觀念估算現金流量折現的信用貼水價差，即證券化分券之定價利率。由於兩模型應用資料及分析難易有些差異，本研究進行了兩模型之比較及變數之影響重要性分析。結果顯示，就模型而言，用Gaussian Copula模型和Fitch VECTOR模型所得到的損失分配差異不太大，資產池內都有很高的機率不會發生損失，較有差異的是Gaussian Copula模型在先償券上不會承擔損失，而Fitch VECTOR模型則會承擔些微損失。就影響變數而言，結果顯示，隨著回復率的增加，權益券的信用價差也逐漸增加，夾層券的信用價差則逐漸遞減，先償券的信用價差則為0。就資產池內標的產業別相關程度而言，在Fitch VECTOR下，全電子產業別各券的信用價差略高於產業別全部分散，即資產池內標的相關性較高的其發生違約機率相對較高，所以所要求的價差要高些； Gaussian Copula模型則相反，但趨勢不是很明顯，其信用價差相當接近差異不大。最後，我們認為雖然此兩種方法在模型上和資料輸入上有很大的差異，但所得到結果大都有一致性的方向。只是Gaussian Copula模型因相關資料獲得不易，所以有較多的假設，較會影響所得到結果精確度，但也較Fitch模型有較多專業衡量的考慮空間。所以不想把重心放在相關資料的搜集，則可採用Fitch VECTOR模型，因他已建好了龐大的歷史資料庫，但不能去作更改，只能作微調；Gaussian Copula模型則是可以依自己的想法放寬限制或增加假設，但他的相關資料不易獲得。
This study applies Gaussian Copula model and Fitch VECTOR credit risks model of the structural form to probe into the price of Collateralized Debt Obligation in each tranche. First we must utilize this two models to estimate the joint loss probability function in the asset pool of the securitization and design the tranches, among them Gaussian Copula model can get credit risks probability and loss distribution through writing the procedure , Fitch VECTOR model is the simple commercial procedure model, it’s database is set by Fitch. Through the application of these two models, we calculate loss probability and relevant parameters and use credit swap notion to estimate the credit spreads of discount cash flow. It is the tranche’s interest rate of the securitization. However these two models have some differences in using and analyzing the data, So the study has carried on the comparison of two models and analyzes the important influence on parameters, The result shows, as regards model, The differences are not very distinct on loss distribution between Gaussian Copula model and Fitch VECTOR model and assets pool will not accrue loss with high probability, The distinct difference is the senior tranche in Gaussian Copula model will not absorb the losses; Fitch VECTOR model will absorb losses slightly . In respect to parameters, the result shows, with increasing of the recovery rate, the credit spread in equity tranche also increases gradually; the credit spread in mezzanine tranche decreases progressively gradually, the credit spread in senior tranche is zero. As regards relevant degree of industry marked in the assets pool, under the Fitch VECTOR model, the credit spreads in each tranche in all electronic industries is higher than the industries all scattering, Because the higher relevant degree in the assets pool, the higher default probability has happened, so the credit spread should be required higher; Gaussian Copula model is opposite, but the trend is not obvious, its credit spread is quite close. Finally, we think that although these two kinds of methods have a very great difference in the model and data input, the results mostly have consistency directions. It is difficult to get relevant data in Gaussian copula model, so we have more assumptions and will affect the accuracy of results. Relative to Fitch model, it has more multi-specialized consideration. So if you do not focus on collecting relevant data, you can adopt Fitch VECTOR model, because Fitch has already built up huge historical database, but you can not alter it, you only adjust finely. Gaussian Copula model can relax limitation and increase the assumption with one's own idea, but the relevant data are difficult to get.
