整合情境資訊之多維度推薦環境
Incorporating Contextual Information in the Multidimensional Recommendation Environment
推薦系統、情境資訊、協同過濾法、內容導向法、多維度推薦
以往，電子商務網站將推薦系統(Recommender System)視為一種新穎的技術，由於消費型態急速改變，推薦系統漸漸成為電子商務網站中不可或缺且被認真看待的重要議題，為電子商務拓展新的契機。許多著名電子商務網站利用推薦系統將瀏覽者轉變為購買者，同時也幫助顧客找到他們的隱性需求，經由分析顧客輪廓來推薦最大化顧客價值之商品。推薦系統以顧客的過去經驗與偏好為基礎，針對目標顧客提供個人化的推薦，以解決資訊負載的問題。個人化的推薦方法主要分為內容導向法(Content-Based Filtering)與協同過濾法(Collaborative Filtering)，兩種方法都各有其優缺點與互補性，但由於傳統推薦技術並未考慮情境資訊(Contextual Information)，因此無法瞭解顧客對某商品喜好的真實因素，在實務上往往造成推薦結果正確性降低並影響推薦品質。本篇論文提出整合情境資訊為基礎的多維度(Multidimensional)推薦模式之概念，強化傳統推薦技術，使用資料倉儲之線上分析處理(OLAP)能力來解決階層間評分的矛盾問題，期望透過建立進階顧客輪廓與多維度分析來找到影響顧客偏好的關鍵因素以提升推薦品質。
In the past, E-commerce (EC) websites treat the recommender system as a new technique. Owing to the type of customer consumption has rapidly changed, the recommender systems gradually became an essential issue and should be treat seriously in EC websites, finally help EC find new opportunities. Lots of famous EC websites use recommender systems to transform customers from browsers to buyers, and also helping customers to find their potential needs. By analyzing customer’s profiles, recommender systems can recommend items so as to maximize customer values.Recommender systems are based on customers’ experiences in the past and their preferences, providing personalized recommendation to solve the problem of information overloading. Recommendation methods of personalization can be primarily divided into content-based filtering and collaborative filtering, each method has its own advantages and disadvantages, but they are complementary. As a result, traditional recommendation methods do not consider the importance of contextual information, therefore, the real factors of customers’ preferences are not known, which often leave recommendation precision to decrease and degrade recommendation quality in business. We bring up an idea of incorporating contextual information in the multidimensional recommendation model and use OLAP to solve the contradiction problem of hierarchical rating, then strengthen traditional recommendation methods. Finally, we expect to find key factors which influence customers’ preferences to improve recommendation quality by building advanced customers’ profiles and multidimensional analysis.
