整合羅吉斯迴歸分析與類神經網路建構兩階段之財務危機預警模型
Integrating Logistic Regression and Artificial Neural Networks to Construct Two-stage Financial Distress Warning Model
羅吉斯迴歸分析、類神經網路、財務危機預警模型

近年來國內上市上櫃公司無預警的宣布重整、跳票或下市，對投資者而言卻只能聽信於定期揭露的公司財務報表而無法即時持股脫手，造成社會成本，因此如何建構一套有效率的預警系統以在公司真正發生危機前預先給予危機警訊，是一個重要的議題。本研究主要提出兩階段之財務危機預警模型以提高財務危機預測能力，讓投資者規避風險。研究對象為2000年到2004年上市櫃公司，分別對銀行業及一般產業樣本找出可能造成公司財務危機的財務變數與非財務變數，再利用交叉驗證法驗證比較羅吉斯迴歸、類神經網路及三種兩階段之財務危機預警模型之正確預測能力。實證結果發現銀行業透過羅吉斯迴歸分析所萃取出的顯著影響變數有逾放比率和定期性存款比率；一般產業所萃取出的顯著變數有資產報酬率、淨值報酬率、營業利益率、速動比率、負債比率、現金流量比率、淨值成長率、存貨週轉率、固定資產週轉率、董監事持股率、大股東持股率，顯示對銀行業衡量時可考量其逾放比率及定期性存款比率之變數；對一般產業衡量時可加入淨值成長率、董監事持股率與大股東持股率之變數。模型預測率就銀行業而言，五種模型的財務危機預測正確率以本文所提之兩階段之財務危機預警模型三最高；就一般產業而言，五種模型的財務危機預測正確率以所提之兩階段之財務危機預警模型一較高，由此可知兩階段之財務預警模型比單一階段之財務預警模型之危機預測正確率佳。
In recent years, the listed and OTC companies in Taiwan unexpectedly declared reform, default or leave listed for the shareholders, they could only rely on the regular financial reports rather than selling the stock on the peaks.  Consequently, How to construct an efficient distress warning systems in order to offer the alert information of the distress in advance is an important issue.  In this paper, we propose three kinds of two-stage financial distress warning models to improve the predict ability of the financial crisis and let shareholders evade the risk.  The data of listed and OTC companies in Taiwan ranging from 2000 to 2004 are selected as studied samples. First of all, we utilize the data of the banking and manufacturing industry to find out possible financial variables and corporate governance variables that account for financial distress. Second, we apply the cross-validation method to compare the performances of logistic regression, artificial neural networks and three kinds of two-stage financial distress models.The result of experiment shows that for the banking the affected variables are the non-performing-loans (NPL) ratio and certificate of depository ratio and for the enterprises, return on assets (ROA), return on equity (ROE), operating margin ratio, acid-test ratio, debt ratio, cash flow ratio, equity growth ratio, inventory turnover rate, fixed assets turnover, percentage of board of directors, percentage of controlling shareholder.  For the banking we can use the non-performing-loan (NPL) ratio and certificate of depository ratio construct financial distress models.  In the other side, for the enterprises we can use percentage of board of directors, percentage of controlling shareholder and equity growth ratio measure the possibility of the financial distress risk. This study shows that for the banking, the third two-stage financial distress model has highest accurate rate among five models. As regards manufacturing industry, the first two-stage financial distress model has highest rate among five models.  Accordingly, it seems that the accurate rate of the two-stage financial model is larger than the one of the one stage-financial model.
