數位時代有線電視產業之價值管理
Value Management of Cable TV in the Digital Age

企業價值管理
多系統經營商
有線電視
產業分析
平衡計分卡

在數位匯流的時代，媒體數位化是世界的潮流與趨勢。而台灣有線電視市佔率高達80%，使得有線電視產業在台灣媒體數位化的過程中居於關鍵地位。有線電視產業面對科技技術的突破與法規環境的變革，轉型與競爭持續發酵。而企業經營的挑戰需要透過各種管理方法與手段及投資融資活動強化企業的價值；最終達到股東價值最大化的目的。成功的關鍵問題就在於如何將企業的目標或願景，透過一系列持續性的管理活動加以貫穿執行。本研究透過對個案公司深入的資料收集與整理，歸納研究出台灣有線電視多系統經營商如何透過價值管理機制的建立，落實價值管理的目標，進行策略創新，提升競爭力。本研究的內容有：（一） 找出有線電視產業價值鏈中之價值驅動因子。（二） 以個案的研究，發展出價值管理策略活動的方法與管理架構，並建構以策略為核心的平衡計分卡，對於未來企業價值導向管理與策略創新作為參考之用。本研究為探索性研究，試圖找出影響有線電視產業價值的策略活動。內容是以文獻整理、專家訪談法與筆者實務的經驗，建構有線電視價值樹，找出該企業的策略活動，就個案研究歸納整理成為一些命題，以供未來其它學者做進一步驗證。中文關鍵字企業價值管理，多系統經營商，有線電視，產業分析，平衡計分卡
In this digital convergence age, digitalizing the media is the current trend. The Cable TV Industry holds a key position in Taiwan’s media digitalization, with Cable System Operators having a high penetration rate of 80% in Taiwan. The Cable TV Industry faces the need for technology breakthrough and the changes in government laws. Thus, management realizes the need to implement various management processes and financing activities to strengthen the industry’s value and to achieve the maximum value for shareholders’ equity in the end.  The key to success is how to achieve the business goal and vision through implementing a series of management activities.  Through in-depth gathering and analysis of a particular company information, this study aims to establish a Value-based Management framework and find out how can Taiwan’s MSO realize value management goals, implement new strategies and increase competitiveness.  The objectives of this thesis includes(1) Finding the value drivers in the value chain of cable industry.(2) Developing a value-based management strategic activities balanced score card, in the case study offer the reference in future management and strategic innovation of the cable business.This thesis aims to discover the strategic activity that would affect cable industry’s value.  Contents are based on compilation of articles, interviews and author’s actual experiences.  It defines the cable TV’s value tree and looks for the business’s strategic activity to come up with some new ideas which can be used and served as reference in some other future studies.Key Words Value Based Management, Cable TV, Industry Analysis
