數位相機產業之競爭策略研究-以個案公司品牌行銷為例
The Competition Strategy Research of DSC Industry- Case Study of a OBM Company.
數位相機、競爭策略、自有品牌
隨著數位化科技應用的日新月異，3C (computer、consumer、communication)領域整合己形成市場主流趨勢。近年來數位相機產業快速成長，在我國電子產業的對外出口比重持續攀升，已然成為臺灣電子產業的重要項目，並成為全球第二大數位相機出口國。然而，目前數位相機由美、日品牌產品佔有全球主要市場，其關鍵零組件多受制於日本，且數位相機產品生命週期短與價格下滑快速，因此該產業的競爭態勢不斷升高，企業要如何在此市場上生存已成為重要經營課題。策略是統合企業內相關資源之整體性指導原則，目的在於戰勝對手，創造公司長期良好的績效(湯明哲，2003)，為企業競爭及經營成敗之關鍵。對於快速變化的科技產業而言，擬定一套成功且可執行之策略更顯重要。競爭優勢及相關理論有助於廠商進行產業的競爭分析，瞭解產業中的競爭情勢，並確認出廠商最直接的競爭者及間接的競爭者。面對產業內的激烈競爭，台灣自有品牌數位相機廠商應朝豐富製造功能內涵與附加價值的方向發展，進而擴大製造服務的範圍與專業深度，建構競爭利基及核心能力。未來台灣自有品牌數位相機廠商不但要能夠快速提供低成本高品質的東西，還要持續開發新產品，並憑藉著長期建立價值鏈體系的優勢，快速且具彈性的提供客戶全球性的物流及資訊流的後勤服務，以強化品牌價值與通路客戶建立親密的伙伴關係，達到雙贏的目的。
Since IT technology development is progressing day by day, 3C (computer, consumer, and communication) integration is the main stream of market trend. Especially DSC (digital still camera) industry grows rapidly, which already become important part of Taiwan IT industry. Now, Taiwan is the second big of DSC manufacturer country. However, USA and Japan have penetrated major parts of DSC worldwide market; also most of the key components are occupied by Japan. At the same time, DSC products’ life cycle is shorter than before and price drop quickly. Therefore, DSC industry competition is getting serious, how to survive well to be company major issue.Strategy is to allocate company resource properly, which is the guidebook to beat competitors and create company long-term performance, which is the key to win or fail. Especially for IT technology, having workable and successful strategy is more important than others. Competition advantage and related theory will help people to do industry competition analysis. While you realize the status, you can identify your direct and indirect competitors in the industry.Facing such serious competition, Taiwan OBM (own brand manufacture) company should try to enrich production ability and develop more value-added. Moreover, enhancing the scope of service and to be more professional, those are the base of core competence. In the near future, Taiwan DSC producers are not only to supply on time with low cost high quality products, but also continually develop new products. With value chain advantage which Taiwanese have established for a long time, we can provide global service efficiently and flexibly. This is right way to strength the relationship with channel partners and brand name value, and which is helpful to get the win-win at the end.
