數位電視與手機電視地面並行廣播之頭端系統建構
Parallel Terrestrial Broadcasting Headend System for DVB-T and DVB-H
手持終端設備數位廣播、數位電視地面廣播、分時切片、多重協定封裝-前向糾錯
隨著數位化的到來以及數位電視的普及，對廣播業者而言，如何掌握數位廣播的技術，就顯得非常重要。而在多種數位廣播服務中的『手持終端設備數位廣播』（Digital Video Broadcasting –Handheld；DVB-H）是近來廣被看好的一項數位廣播服務，此技術最初是由歐洲數位視訊廣播技術發展組織（Digital Video Broadcasting Project；DVB）以歐規數位電視地面廣播（Digital Video Broadcasting – Terrestrial；DVB-T）為基礎所提出的技術標準。DVB-H廣播爲了因應手持終端設備的特性，增加了低功率消耗、高移動性、共通平台與頻道切換服務不中斷等功能，除此之外，資料的封包模式是可以與網際網路通訊協定相互傳遞為架構以方便用來增加多媒體的數據廣播以及增加互動的服務。在本論文中，我們是以DVB-T系統為基礎架構來研究：1.  探討如何在現有的頭端系統中插入DVB-H設備。2.  詳細介紹分時切片（Time-slicing）與多重協定封裝-前向糾錯(Multi-Protocol Encapsulation - Forward Error Correction；MPE – FEC ) 兩項關鍵技術是如何讓手持終端設備更省電與接收更順暢。3.  依據所提出的並行架構進行模擬實驗，驗證所提出的頭端系統架構能正常並行DVB-T與DVB-H廣播。4.  利用量測儀器來量測與比較，並將所得的結果驗證理論推導的正確性。5.  最後將並行架構提供廣播相關業者參考，期許能根據不同的需求來調整系統架構，以使DVB-H廣播服務能順利推展。
With the approach of the era of digital television around the world. How to grasp the techniques of the digital broadcasting has become a very important topic. Digital Video Broadcasting-Handheld（DVB-H） is the next generation delivery systems of digital broadcasting service . The technology standard of DVB-H was developed by the European DVB Project and the transmission technology was defined by the Digital Video Broadcasting –Terrestrial（DVB-T）standard. For the characteristic of the cell-phone,  the functions of low-power、high-mobility、common platform and soft handover between networks, etc have been increased. In addition, it is valid for extensions in facilitating the reception of IP datacasting services on handheld devices.This paper discusses where to insert the equipment of DVB-H into DVB-T headend system. This paper also introduces the two key technologies in the headend system  “Time - slicing” and “Multi - Protocol Encapsulation - Forward Error correction（MPE-FEC）”. Finally, we also provide the measurements of an experimental of parallel system and verify the accuracy of  MUX output transport stream for the frame of the system . In conclusion, from our analysis, simulation and measurements, we learn that the Power Saving can be improved by the DVB-H.
