新台幣利率交換買賣價差之實證研究
An Empirical Investigation of Quoted Spreads for NTD Interest Rate Swaps.
利率交換、買賣價差、交換價差、波動性風險、違約風險、利率期間結構、向量自我迴歸模型、衝擊反應函數、變異數分解、因果關係檢定、虛擬變數

　　利率交換的精神起源於1981年8月世界銀行與IBM的換匯交易，1982年開始有了第一宗的利率交換交易；至今，依據國際清算銀行的統計資料，其交易規模早已遠超過其他利率衍生性商品，成為交換商品及利率衍生性商品的最大宗，每年的交易金額仍然持續增加，重要性可見一斑。　　國內的利率交換市場也隨著金融開放的政策下鬆綁，國內第一筆的利率交換交易亦於民國八十三年成交，爾後，隨著市場開放程度的增加，更多的報價商及交易管道也使國內的交易量逐年攀升；由於利率交換是利率風險控管及增加資金運用效益的重要管道，契約買賣價差的大小更直關乎交易者的避險成本，國內則尚未有學者以此為題而為研究，因此，本研究以新台幣利率交換契約的買賣價差為研究目標，分析其歷史變化及期間溢酬的存在，並探討在某些經濟變數發生改變時，新台幣利率交換契約買賣價差的互動影響。　　考量向量自我迴歸模型不僅可測量出各變數直接對新台幣利率交換買賣價差之影響，並瞭解各變數相互影響對交換契約買買價差的間接效果，加以不必擔心共線性的問題，因此運用向量自我迴歸模型進行實證研究；另外，在探討市場競爭程度影響的議題上，由於與價差間的因果關係單純，因此輔以最小平方法進行實證，獲得結果如下：1、實證分析結果顯示，各年期利率交換契約的買賣價差和交換價差，隨著市場的開放與成長，都有明顯下降的趨勢。2、買賣價差中明顯含有契約期間的溢酬。3、違約風險、波動性風險與各年期利率交換契約之買賣價差有顯著正向相關係；市場競爭程度與各年期利率交換契約的買賣價差有顯著負向關係。4、波動性風險和各天期交換契約之買賣價差間存在回饋關係，表示波動性風險的變化，能夠反應利率交換契約買賣價差的波動，同時，由於交換市場的交易額十分龐大，也相對地對其他市場產生影響。5、衝擊反應函數之結果顯示，當利率期間結構受到衝擊時，短期內報價商將以縮小買賣價差，減少可能的衝擊與損失。6、短期內，違約風險和三年期以下之利率交換契約買賣價差呈負相關，和五年期以上契約則呈正相關，可能與短期契約的套利活動較為活絡有關。
The interest rate swap market is now represents one of the major portions of the derivative market. Although the instrument appeared in Taiwan in 1993, interest rate swaps have gown into a market with volume estimated NTD15,008 billion at the end of 2005. With the dramatic growth in volume has come concern about the empirical research on Taiwan interest rate swap market.　　Quoted spread is an issue of major concern to market participants. Academic research on interest rate swap concentrated on the pricing of interest rate swap contracts, the features with the users of interest rate swaps, and the regulation of swap market. Few studies have examined the factors between bid and offer spread and gathered the empirical evidence of the NTD IRS market. The main goal of this dissertation is to investigate the implications of default risk, volatility risk, market competition and slope of term structure in swap bid-offer spread. Using historical daily quotations from June 1999 to April 2006, we construct a vector auto-regression model to find the manner that some factors affect interest rate swap bid-offer spread. Stated the summary as following1、From the empirical evidence, the spread between the swap bid and offer rates decline significantly for all swap maturities.2、To examine the historical quotations, we get the results that exhibit a substantial reduction in swap spreads .3、Term premium is exist in the rates quoted by swap dealers.4、The bid-offer spreads of NTD interest rate swaps are pertinent to liquidity risk, volatility risk, the slope of risk-free term structure, and market competition. Obviously, liquidity risk, volatility risk and the slope of risk-free term structure affect quoted spreads positively and market competition affects quoted spreads negatively.5、Findings reveals that quoted spreads has two-way causality with the volatility.6、From the impulse response analysis, the short-term swap quoted spreads (under 3years) is inversely related to default risk. However, long-dated swaps (over 5years) quoted spreads is related to default risk.7、According to the result of impulse response, quoted spread is inversely related to the slope of risk-free term structure in a short period of time.
