旅遊網站服務品質對顧客關係品質及忠誠度影響之研究
The Effects of Service Quality on Customer’s Relationship Quality and Loyalty to Travel Website
旅遊網站、服務品質、關係品質、忠誠度
由於網際網路的廣泛應用，目前旅遊電子商務也隨之蓬勃發展，線上旅遊業成為少數成功的電子商務產業，在面臨旅遊網站同業間之如此競爭的環境下，旅遊網站經營者思考著要如何才能留住原有客源、開發新客源，怎樣才能從競爭激烈的環境中脫穎而出，提高網站的服務品質或許可以增加與顧客之間更佳的關係以及提升顧客忠誠度，而本研究目的為檢定旅遊網站的服務品質對於顧客的關係品質及忠誠度是否有正相關的影響。   本研究以實驗室實驗法進行研究，由研究者建置虛擬旅遊網站，網頁中操弄所欲探討的各項變數 (包含安全性、反應性及可靠性)，而受試者瀏覽操弄的網頁後，再依照當時的線上感受進行問卷的填答，而經由資料的統計與分析發現：一、旅遊網站服務品質的安全性、可靠性對顧客關係品質有顯著影響。二、顧客關係品質對網路顧客忠誠度有顯著影響。三、旅遊網站服務品質對顧客忠誠度有顯著影響。   本研究結果證實，旅遊網站服務品質確實會影響網站與線上顧客關係的建立，且關係建立的品質對顧客的忠誠度也有顯著的影響。因此，建議旅遊網站經營者需持續不斷地改善網站的服務品質，以提升顧客對網站的滿意及信任，如此不僅能維持良好的關係品質，還能因此達成創造顧客忠誠度的目的。
The mass usage of the Internet makes the travel website industry grow drastically and becomes a very fruitful business during the past years. Among the emergent Internet business models, the virtual travel is one of the few industries that have been implemented successfully. Due to its success, the firms in the virtual travel industry and the conventional travel firms having websites are facing a merciless competition. In this highly competitive market, how a firm can maintain its customers’loyalty is very crucial to sustain its competitive advantage and make itself a standout among the competitors. Higher website service quality may lead to better customer relationship and may thus increase customer loyalty. The purpose of this study is to empirically test the hypothesized relationship that the service quality of a travel website will positively affect its customers’ relationship quality and loyalty.   We conducted an experiment to test the above-hypothesized relationship. This study designed a virtual travel website. The independent variables corresponding to the service quality of websites consist of security, responsiveness, and reliability and the dependent variable is customers’ relationship quality and loyalty. The subjects of the experiment were asked to browse the website following the experiment guidelines set by the researcher. After having browsed thoroughly the illustrated website, the subjects were asked to fill a questionnaire. The response data were then analyzed by using the method of analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test our hypotheses.   The analysis of our experiment result supported the following three hypotheses1.The security and reliability of a travel website positively  affects its customers’ relationship quality.2.The customers’ relationship quality of a travel website positively  affects its customers’ loyalty.3.The service quality of a travel website positively affects its  customers’loyalty.   The result of this research shows that the service quality of travel website indeed affects relationship established between website and online customers, and the quality of relationship influences the customers’ loyalty significantly. Hence, this study suggests that website manager must improve the service quality of website continually in order to promote customers’satisfaction and trust of website, therefore not only maintain the better relationship, but also achieve an objective of customers’loyalty.
