日台共學制度之研究-以對台灣人的影響為中心(1922-1937)
A Research on the Japanese-Taiwanese Educational Desegregation during Japanese Colonial Period Focused on its Influence upon Taiwanese People from 1922 to 1937
殖民教育、日台共學、台灣教育令、殖民政策、同化政策、內地延長主義

1895年台灣因甲午戰爭而割讓給日本。日本接收台灣時，對於台灣混亂的社會秩序施予語言同化政策，期待盡速將台灣人日本化。對此，日本當局透過教育政策，以教授台灣人日語，來達成同化台灣人的目的。然而，日本在台灣所實施的教育政策，卻進行所謂的雙軌教育。亦即將台灣人與日本人區分，在兩個平行的學校系統下，個別實施教育。在此種雙軌教育制度下，台灣人在就學方面遭遇到許多不平等的待遇，就學率也因此相對地低落很多。而這樣的差別教育終於引起了許多台灣人的不滿。第八任總督田健治郎為了順應民情，且因為當時以1919年發生的朝鮮獨立運動為首，世界各殖民地受世界大戰後民主主義思潮影響，民族自決運動澎派。對此種種，田健治郎乃發布第二次台灣教育令，以同化主義來安撫民心。此台灣教育令有別於1919年發布的台灣教育令，在制度上，取消了日、台教育系統的差別。其特色為「日台人共學」，亦即撤廢了至今存在於日、台人之間的差別教育。依此教育令，在台灣所實施的教育，不分日、台人，全部給予平等的機會。因此，在措施上改用「常用日語者進小學校，非常用日語者進公學校」，而中等以上學校則採日台共學制。本論文從日本領有台灣到實施共學制度為止，依據各教育政策將教育史劃分成三個時期。首先透過分析各時期的社會背景，探討日本當局所實施之殖民政策的重點。並且頗析各時期殖民政策與教育政策間之關聯性。尤其著重於共學制度實施後，針對就學狀況的數據，以及社會上所反應出來的現象加以分析，闡明此政策實施前後，對台灣人有何具體影響。
Taiwan ceded to Japan in 1895 because of the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895. After Taiwan was seized by Japan, Japan authorities implemented a policy of language assimilation in order to assimilate Taiwanese as soon as possible. Therefore, Japanese authorities educated Taiwanese Japanese to achieve the purpose of Taiwanese have Japanese character.However, in the beginning of Japanese colonial period, the education system implemented in Taiwan separated Japanese from Taiwanese. Under the two-track education system, Taiwanese encountered a lot of unequal treatment in going to school, and the education rate was very low. At last, such a difference raised dissatisfaction. In addition to, Taiwanese received the ideological trend of the democracy after the world war Ⅰ and self-determination doctrine advocated by US President Wilson. Therefore, Taiwan governor palace announced the new Taiwan educational order in 1922. One of the new policies in this order was ‘Educational Desegregation’; all people have the equal education chance.The purpose of this policy was for dispel the education difference between Japanese and Taiwanese. Basing on the education policies were implemented, this thesis divides the education history from 1922 to 1937 into three periods. This research analysis education policy in each period, especially focus on educational desegregation policy, and the influence on Taiwanese people.
