智慧型保全資源與監視系統整合配置之研究-以台灣高鐵台中段為例
A Study of Intelligent Allocation for Integrating Security Resource And CCTV - An Example from Taichung Section of Taiwan High Speed Rail
高速鐵路、保全服務、監視系統、決策支援系統、地理資訊系統、分析層級順序法、多目標規劃
近來台灣鐵路發生了所謂「鐵道怪客」事件，其專門破壞鐵軌設施的行徑，已造成乘客的傷亡。警方將此視為「嚴重治安事件」並採取防護措施，例如於重要路段增加巡邏人力，重要廠站設施或橋隧增設監錄設備等。即將於2006年10月營運通車的台灣高鐵也面臨了同樣的鐵道安全問題。有鑑於此，台灣高鐵公司已在各車站、基地及沿線重要設施地段，聘請民間保全業者，定時或不定時巡查；另外，重要廠站設施、據點、等也設有監視器加以安全監控。在資源有限與預算固定的條件下，如何有效地配置高鐵保全監視資源，達到降低危險及保障安全的目的呢？本研究首先蒐集資料及參酌安全專家意見，找出配置因素，並結合高鐵保全追蹤系統的區域巡邏資料，利用分析層級程序法 (analytic hierarchy process, AHP)取得各目標區段安全的優先向量值，將資源的單位成本、監控區域範圍及最少需求量等做為限制式，利用多目標規劃法求解得出目標區段各種資源之建議配置量，並以地理資訊系統(geographic information system, GIS)呈現其地理位置。本研究的管理分析提出高鐵安全單位在各種資源改變時，其所應該採取的因應策略，以期能達到預防犯罪、監控安全、及彈性有效地配置保全資源的目標。
Recently, the damaged accidents, a so-called “Strangers on the Railway of Taiwan”, have already caused some passengers injured and dead. The police regarded this as “a serious affairs of public security”, and adopted a series of emergent policies, such as increasing the manpower of patrols on some important road sections, installing monitors in some important facilities or bridge tunnels etc. Similarly, Taiwan High Speed Rail Company (THSRC) which will soon start the traffic operation in October of 2006 also faces the same problem of railway security. In this situation, THSRC already hired the private security company for regularly or irregularly patrolling each important station, facility, depot, railway line etc. Besides, monitors are also installed in some important station facilities, base, etc. to maintain the safe supervision.Under limited resources and finite budgets of THSRC, decision makers need effectively to allocate the human resources of security and electronic monitors. First, suggestions from security experts, knowledge management systems (KMS), each station, etc. are considered in this study. Then, all required data such as geo-coding data from geographic information system (GIS), factors used in analytic hierarchy process (AHP), patrol records of “Security Activity Tracking System”, unit cost of resource, region scope of monitor, numbers of minimum demand, etc. are collected and the subsequent data of computational results, such as the weight of each criterion, are also obtained. Finally, a multi-objective linear programming (MOLP) are formulated and solved by using total weighted method and Lingo 9.0. As the solutions of MOLP are presented in the prototype of this study, flexibility, adaptability, etc. can be implemented by evolutionary prototyping which includes interactive involvement of decision makers.Managerial analysis of this study gives the security department of THSRC some suggestions and guidelines which THSRC should adopt as various resources change and any event incurs, and then these alternatives can reach the purpose of preventing crime, supervising and controlling the security continuously, and effectively and flexibly allocating limited resources.
