智慧型企業併購決策評估模式之研究–以某電子科技公司為例
A Study of Intelligent Evaluation Models of Merger & Acquisitions - Using Some Electronic & Technology Company as Example

決策支援系統
企業併購
知識管理
分析層級程序法

隨著產業經濟結構改變，企業基於提昇競爭力，擴大市占率等不同的考量下，進行企業合併(merger)已經是一個不可避免的趨勢。為了提升企業決策者在面對合併的狀況時，對併購的問題能夠做有效客觀的分析，進而選擇最佳的併購模式以有效發揮合併綜效，本研究透過資訊技術、分析層級程序法(analytic hierarchy process, AHP)與知識管理(knowledge management)的整合應用，發展出一套智慧型企業併購決策評估模式決策支援系統，以提供企業決策者一個最佳的策略決策參考資訊。本研究以某電子科技公司做為本研究之實證個案，其中經由企業網站所公佈的資料、網路股市所提供企業相關資料，做為本研究雛型系統之基本資料與個案資料之來源，並整合知名AHP商用軟體Expert Choice作為AHP演算主體。透過雛型系統的實作測試，以求得最佳併購模式建議。最後，在不同情境參數設定與個案分析比較下，管理分析可以由上述求解過程及分析中得到多方面顯著的結果。依據不同個案分析結果可以發現，當個案的屬性與AHP的分析案例的屬性相似度越高時，則雛型系統建議的可行性越高，反之則越低。而實證結果顯示，本研究雛型系統實作測試的結果與該企業實際合併的狀況相似。
As a result of dramatic change of industrial structure, in order to enlarge market shares and enhance competitive advantages for most of companies, merger and acquisition has become an inevitable trend. During the merger and acquisition, the decision maker of a company must analyze the benefits of merger and estimate the risks and problems which may occur during or after the merger.For the purpose of success for merging some companies, some sound proof and effective methodology are needed to support the decision maker while choosing the best and most efficient merger and acquisition model. An intellectual merger and acquisition evaluation model is developed in this study and it can be used to provide the best strategic information for the decision makers and incorporated in a knowledge management system (KMS). For an empirical experiment, all required data, information, etc. of a known electronic company are collected through its website and related online stock systems and used in a prototype system. Further, some famous analytic hierarchy process (AHP) business software, Expert Choice, is used for analyzing the data and then obtaining some best suggestions from the merger and acquisition model and related knowledge of the empirical example.Finally, under different simulation parameters and scenario comparisons, some major obvious results are obtained from above process and can be added into KMS. The results and their valuable information provided by the prototype system of this study are nearly identical with the actual merger and acquisition situation of the empirical company. According to the results of analysis and comparison, if the attributes are in higher (lower) similarity, then the reliability of this prototype system is higher (lower).
