服務創新、情緒體驗與忠誠意圖之關係－以主題餐廳為例
The relationship among service innovation, emotional experience and loyalty intention - A case study of themed restaurants
服務創新、情緒體驗、忠誠意圖、主題餐廳
現今世界上許多先進國家的產業結構都以服務業為重，台灣亦然。本研究認為透過服務創新是可以提升服務業的附加價值，是台灣未來服務業發展所需必備的。體驗經濟時代的來臨(Pine Ⅱ& J.Gilmore,2000)，消費者的情緒體驗，無異牽動著之後消費決策和推薦行為，對服務提供者影響甚大。所以本研究將探討的是服務創新、情緒體驗與忠誠意圖之關係。　　依據先前文獻(許惠芬，2002)提出用服務場景、服務傳遞過程和服務產品組合來衡量消費者所認知的服務創新；使用Mehrabian and Russell (1974)提出愉悅-喚起-主控(pleasure-arousal-dominance，PAD)情緒構面量表衡量消費者對於服務創新的情緒體驗為何，以及最後對消費者的忠誠意圖，即重購意圖與推薦意圖的影響又為何。　　將上述各衡量構面之間關係的假設建構出本研究的結構關係模型，選擇的研究對象為在服務業中特色鮮明的「主題餐廳」，以在主題餐廳消費過後的消費者為實際發放問卷的對象，共發放300份問卷，有效回收260份。主要運用LISREL做為驗證假說的分析工具，並以整體性的觀點進行統整說明。　　主要實證發現為服務創新大致能對情緒體驗正向影響、情緒體驗大致能對忠誠意圖正向影響和服務創新對重購意圖並無直接顯著相關。亦即說明了服務創新是須經過情緒體驗的中介效果才能對消費者的重購意圖有正向影響。因此，建議業者更需不斷的求新求變，讓消費者每次都能重新創造、維持並強化正面的情緒體驗，才能持續不斷的創造出更大商機。
Nowadays, the service sector plays a critical role in the industrial structure of most developed countries. And Taiwan is no exception. Through this study, a belief has been established that service innovation can elevate the added value of service industries, which is necessary for the future development of Taiwan’s service sector. With the advent of the Experience Economy (Pine II & J. Gilmore, 2000), the emotional experience of consumers undoubtedly exerts significant influence on their future consumption decisions and recommending behaviors. Thus, emotional experience has a crucial impact on service providers. This study explores the relationship among service innovation, emotional experience and loyalty intention.  A study previously made in this field (Huifen Xu, 2002) has proposed the idea of measuring consumer-perceived service innovation by the mix of the servicescape, the service delivery process, and the service product bundling. Another two academics, Mehrabian and Russell (1974), have suggested the pleasure-arousal-dominance, PAD, model, to describe and measure consumers’ emotional experience of service innovation and the influence of experience on consumers’ loyalty intention, in other words, their repurchase and recommending intentions.  A model indicating the structural relations between these dimensions have been hypothesized in this study on the basis of the relations between the above-mentioned dimensions. Theme restaurants, a type of industry distinctive in the service sector, are the research targets adopted in this study. Questionnaires have been given to consumers who have made consumption in the theme restaurant. A total of 300 questionnaires have been given out and 260 been retrieved availably. LISREL is adopted as the analyzing instrument to verify the hypothesis. An integrated conclusion has been drawn from the overall research results.  Research results show that service innovation basically has positive influence on emotional experience and that emotional experience generally has positive influence on loyalty intention. However, service innovation does not have direct or marked links to repurchase intention. This shows that the mediating effect provided by emotional experience is necessary for service innovation to exert positive influence on consumers’ repurchase intention. Therefore, companies are advised to constantly innovate so that consumers can always recreate, maintain, and solidify their emotional experience, which is the only way for companies to create larger business opportunities.
