服務人員外顯行為對顧客情緒、顧客滿意度及顧客忠誠影響之研究─以性別角色與人格特質為干擾變數
The influence of service providers' behavioral display on customer satisfaction and loyalty-the moderating effect of gender role and personality traits
顧客情緒、情緒傳染、顧客滿意度、顧客忠誠、性別角色、人格特質
現在是一個體驗經濟的時代，在行銷領域中，體驗行銷已經被熱切的討論著。若深究體驗對消費者之影響，可發現情緒為影響消費者最根本之元素；現代大腦學家也已證實情緒甚至會影響理性之決策，可被視為人類行為之根本。因此，證實情緒之效用及來源並找出較有價值之情緒，是相當值得探討之問題。另外，與消費者心理有關者尚有其本身之特質，這對於其本身情緒可能有相當程度之影響。過去常常以顧客性別做為區別顧客特性之方法，但在社會變遷快速、人類行為驅於中性化的現象下，以顧客內心之性別來做為區分之準則可能將有更佳之效力；而人格特質也被視為影響人類行為模式的深層力量來源，因此了解這些心理特質將更有助於了解顧客之特性並做出更好的因應之道。  在服務業中，由於服務的「不可分性」，因此服務人員與顧客將有相當密切且頻繁的接觸，這相當容易激起顧客內心之情緒，因此情緒相關議題對於服務業而言是格外重要的。服務人員可被視為服務業中相當重要之生財工具，但難以完全控制其表現。了解服務人員之外在行為與顧客情緒之關聯，將有助於找出較好之行為模式，以做為教育訓練之參考。所以本研究以服務人員之行為、態度、儀表為自變數，探討其與顧客情緒之關係，及是否會進而影響顧客之滿意度與顧客忠誠；另外以顧客之性別、性別角色與人格特質中之外向性、神經質做為服務人員外顯行為與顧客情緒間關係之干擾變數。實際問卷發放以百貨業之服飾櫃之顧客為對象，總共發放378份問卷，回收率達100%，並以SPSS做為統計分析之工具，以迴歸分析及變異數分析來探討變數間之關係。  本研究實證結果發現，服務人員之儀表、行為、態度對於顧客情緒有相當重大之影響，而服務人員之行為相對於儀表及態度為對顧客情緒影響最大者。而顧客情緒也顯著的影響顧客滿意度，並進而造成顧客忠誠；但發現顧客情緒對顧客忠誠也存在直接之影響，其中並以溫馨、興奮、不厭惡等情緒對百貨服飾業之顧客忠誠最有效果。在干擾變數方面，顧客性別沒有干擾效果存在但顧客性別角色則存有干擾效果，並以中性化之顧客影響最大；而人格特質中外向性無干擾效果但對顧客情緒有直接的影響，神經質則與服務人員較負向之外顯行為有交互作用而有導致較負面情緒之效果。
Examining the nature of customer experiences, we will find the emotion is a basic element that can affect customers’ behaviors. Scientists have proved that the emotion would trigger human behaviors and affect people’s decisions making. Therefore, it is worth further discussion to look into the utility and detonators of emotion. In addition, some personal traits are also believed to correlate with customers’ psychological situation. Marketers used to distinguish customers by gender; however, gender role turns to be a stronger predictor than gender because of the huge change of society in which androgynous trait becomes exist in people nowadays. Besides, customers’ personality is also viewed as an antecedent of behavior. Understanding these psychological factors could help us to comprehend customers’ attributes well and offer managers good implications about how to deal with customers.    In the service industry, service providers have to contact with customers, and then transactions can complete. Therefore, customers’ emotion is usually aroused due to the process of service contact. Since issues of emotion are critical in service industry, service providers are supposed to play a key role in comforting as well as satisfying customers’ emotional needs. This study believed that examining the relationships between service providers’ behaviors and customers’ emotion would contribute to uncover a better behavioral model of service providers. As a result, this research intends to find how service providers’ behaviors, including appearance, behaviors, and attitudes, would influence customers’ emotion and therefore provides some empirical implications for managers in educating personnel a better way to behave during service encounter. This study also attempts to look into that whether or not customers’ emotion would lead to customer satisfaction and loyalty. Additionally, extraversion and neuroticism of personality are set as the moderating variables so that we can understand whether or not these elements would affect the relationship between service providers’ behavioral display and customers’ emotion. The study chooses customers in the clothes division of department stores in Taipei as the research sample and asks them to help fulfill the questionnaires that later are analyzed by SPSS 10.0.    The study finds service providers’ appearance, behavior, and attitude will influence customers’ emotion, and service providers’ behavior is the most powerful antecedent. Besides, while customers’ emotion would affect customer satisfaction and in turn enhance customer loyalty, customers’ emotion would also directly influence customer loyalty. Emotions of warm, exciting, and ir-repugnant especially have stronger effects on customer loyalty. As for the moderating effects, gender doesn’t significantly moderate the relationships between service providers’ behaviors and customer emotion, but gender role, especially androgynous one, does. As far as personality concerned, the moderating effect of extroversion is insignificant; however, the outcome indicates that extroversion would directly affect the customer emotions. Moreover, neuroticism is proved to elicit negative emotions owing to service providers’ negative behavioral display.
