期貨結算系統SPAN之研究
A Study of the Clearing System SPAN
標準組合風險分析、風險陣列、偵測全距、跨商品價差折抵值
本文在標準組合風險分析(Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk , SPAN)的保證金計算原理及流程作了深入的探討，了解SPAN及台灣期交所之現行結算保證金之設計原理與VaR雷同，保證金會隨標的價格與波動性調整，但SPAN與臺灣期貨交易所現行系統不同之處有兩方面， SPAN將價格與其計算保證金有考慮Delta Risk Gamma Risk、Vega Risk及極端價格變動之情境。另一方面，臺灣期貨交易所現行的結算系統不考慮同一帳戶的同一商品多空部位保證金之折抵，也不考慮跨商品間保證金之折抵，而SPAN將同一帳戶之商品看成一個投資組合，具風險分散效果可互相折抵。範例試算結果證明，SPAN的結算保證金為臺灣期貨交易所現行之應收金額的19.4%，顯示SPAN比較能夠滿足風險控管機制，又能夠兼顧期貨交易人資金運用效率。
In this thesis, an in-depth study has been made in respect of the calculation principles and procedures of SPAN (Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk).  It is understood that SPAN, as well as the existing clearing margin system used by SFE Taiwan , both stem from a similar design principle as VaR., i.e., the margin requirement will be adjusted with changes in the price of the underlying commodity or the volatility.  It has also been found, nevertheless, that SPAN differs from the existing clearing margin system of SFE Taiwan in two aspects.  Firstly, SPAN takes into account changes in price and volatility simultaneously. This implies that factors such as Delta Risk, Gamma Risk, Vega Risk and scenarios when extreme price change occurs, have all been considered in the process of calculating the clearing margins.  On the other hand, the existing clearing margin system of SFE does not consider the offset of long and short positions generated by the same commodity within the same account, neither does it allow the offset of clearing margins for intra-commodity spread.  SPAN, contrarily, treats the commodity under the same account as an entire investment portfolio and allows the offset of correlated risks.  From the calculation example provided, the clearing margin calculated by SPAN represents 19.4% of the margin receivable under the existing clearing margin system of SFE.  The results show that SPAN can better meet the requirements of a risk control mechanism, and in the meantime enables higher efficiency in fund utilization by investor.
