未婚教保人員單身壓力、婚姻態度及生活滿意度之相關研究
A Study on the Single-Person Stress, Marriage Attitude and LifeSatisfaction of Unmarried Preschool Teachers
未婚、教保人員、單身壓力、婚姻態度、生活滿意度

本研究主要目的在探討未婚教保人員單身壓力、婚姻態度與生活滿意度之現況，並進一步探究未婚教保人員不同背景變項對單身壓力、婚姻態度及生活滿意度之差異，以及單身壓力、婚姻態度對生活滿意度之相關情形。本研究採取問卷調查法進行研究，以臺北縣市及桃園縣年齡27歲至49歲的未婚女性教保人員為對象，使用「未婚教保人員單身壓力量表」、「未婚教保人員婚姻態度量表」和「未婚教保人員生活滿意度量表」等測量工具，共計發出450份，得有效之問卷398份。研究資料經描述性統計、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、皮爾遜積差相關、以及多元迴歸分析，其主要發現如下：一、未婚教保人員對單身壓力的感受情形方面，未婚教保人員所感受到的壓力是屬於接近中等偏低的情形，而感受到最大的壓力來源為「來自父母的壓力」，最低的壓力來源為「來自親友的壓力」。二、未婚教保人員對婚姻態度的感受情形方面，未婚教保人員所感受到的態度是屬於接近中等偏高的狀態，其中對「婚姻的感受」得分為最高，而對「婚姻的意向」最低。三、未婚教保人員對生活滿意度的感受情形方面，未婚教保人員對生活滿意度是屬於接近中等偏高的狀態，而「對自我的滿意」為最高，最不滿意的為「情緒穩定的狀態」。四、未婚教保人員的不同背景變項（年齡、任教園所年資、父母的婚姻狀況、與父母的關係、和異性交往情形）對生活滿意度分析方面：（一）年齡方面，以33歲以上未婚教保人員對自我、工作以及情緒穩定的狀態方面的滿意為較高；（二）任教園所年資方面，11年以上未婚教保人員對自我的滿意為較高，任教11年以上未婚教保人員對工作的滿意為較高，任教5年以下對人際關係的滿意為較高；（三）父母的婚姻狀況方面，以父母離婚、分居及喪偶的未婚教保人員對自我的滿意和情緒穩定的狀態為較高，父母婚姻完整未婚教保人員對工作的滿意為較高；（四）與父母的關係方面，以與父母關係良好的未婚教保人員對自我、工作及人際關係的滿意為較高；（五）和異性交往情形方面，無男朋友的未婚教保人員對自我的滿意、情緒穩定的狀態及對人際關係的滿意為較高。五、未婚教保人員的單身壓力、婚姻態度與生活滿意度的相關分析方面，當單身壓力越大與生活滿意度的統計結果顯示大多有顯著負相關；婚姻態度與生活滿意度顯示有些呈現顯著正相關。六、未婚教保人員的年齡越長、與父母的關係良好以及婚姻的感受越正向的對自我的滿意有顯著的正向解釋力；未婚教保人員的年齡越長則對工作的滿意有顯著的正向解釋力；未婚教保人員的年齡越長、沒有男朋友以及來自社會的壓力越低，對情緒穩定的狀態有顯著的正向解釋力；未婚教保人員與父母的關係良好以及來自社會的壓力越低，對人際關係的滿意有顯著的正向解釋力。本研究最後根據研究結果，提出建議以供教保人員及家庭教育單位參考，並提供未來研究可進行之方向。
A Study on the Single-Person Stress, Marriage Attitude and Life Satisfaction of Unmarried Preschool TeachersAbstractThe focus of this research is to study the relations among single-person stress, marriage attitude and life satisfaction of unmarried preschool teachers. It also investigates the relations of the single-person stress, marriage attitude and life satisfaction of unmarried preschool teachers from different backgrounds.Questionnaires are utilized to investigate female unmarried preschool teachers at the age of 27 to 49 who live in Taipei and Taoyuan city. Three questionnaires including “Measure of Single-Person Stress for Unmarried Preschool Teachers”, “Measure of Marriage Attitude for Unmarried Preschool Teachers”, and “Measure of Life Satisfaction of Unmarried Preschool Teachers” are distributed to 450 teachers and 398 questionnaires are valid. The quantitative data has been analyzed by frequency statistics, t-test, single factor ANOVA, Pearson correlation and multiple linear regressions. The results are shown as below1.  The stress of unmarried preschool teachers having toward “being single” is a little below than average. The major stress comes from parents while the minor stress is from relatives and friends.2.  The marriage attitude of unmarried preschool teachers is a little higher than average. They have more positive and the highest score on the feeling of marriage; however, they also have the lowest score on marriage intension.3.  As for life satisfaction, unmarried preschool teachers have the higher self-satisfaction but they are unsatisfied with the stability of their emotion.4.  Unmarried preschool teachers’ life satisfaction has also been analyzed according to different backgrounds. First, from age variation, for those who are more than 33 years old have the higher satisfaction on self, work and stability of emotion. Second, in seniority, for those who have 11 years working experiences have the higher satisfaction on self. For those who have more than 11 years working experiences have the higher satisfaction on work, and for those who have less than 5 years working experiences have the higher satisfaction on interpersonal relationship. Third, for marriage status of parents, those unmarried preschool teachers whose parents are divorced, separated and bereft of spouse have the higher satisfaction on self and the higher status of emotional stability. And those whose parents’ marriage is full-completed have the higher satisfaction on work. Fourth, for relationship with parents, those who are close to their parents have the higher satisfaction on self, work and interpersonal relationship. Fifth, for relationship with the opposite sex, those who do not have boy-friend have the higher satisfaction on self, status of emotional stability and interpersonal relationship.5.  According to the results of correlation, most dimensions of the stress of being single is negatively related to life satisfaction, while some dimensions of marriage attitude is positively related to life satisfaction.6.  From the results of multiple regression, the age of unmarried preschool teachers, the relationship with parents and the marriage attitude have significantly positive prediction on life satisfaction. The teachers who have more ages, have no boy-friend and less social stress, have significant higher satisfaction on emotional stability. For those who are close to their parents and have less social stress, have significant higher satisfaction on interpersonal relationship.According to the results of this study, suggestions are provided for preschool teachers and family life educators. Issues for further study are also provided.
