桃園縣國民小學體育課實施游泳教學現況及阻礙因素之調查研究
A study of the implementation and constraints of swimming teaching in elementary schools in Tao-Yuan County
桃園縣、國民小學、游泳教學
本研究主要目的在瞭解桃園縣國民小學體育課實施游泳教學現況情形，並探討不同背景變項之學校對游泳教學實施之差異情形，以及了解實施游泳教學其困境情形。本研究對象為桃園縣187所國民小學，採問卷與訪談方式進行調查研究。根據實際調查所得資料，以描述性統計、交叉分析、卡方檢定進行分析：所得結果如下：一、  實施的現況目前實施體育課游泳教學的學校佔全縣國小比例70.4％；游泳教學師資以校外游泳教練為主，達96.5％；國小自有游泳池學校僅五所；合作游泳池對象以學區內外民營游泳池為主；實施經費以學生部份自費配合政府補助為最多，學生全額自費其次；推動游泳教學之主因為縣府命令，佔73.5％，校長指示居次，佔55.9％；學校承辦人對於推動體育課游泳教學感到滿意。二、  實施的阻礙因素場地設施方面，游泳池不足且不均；師資問題方面，校內師資不足；經費問題方面，政府補助困難與學校財務拮据；交通問題方面，耗費車程時間與安全因素影響最大；課務問題方面，排課不易最為嚴重；收費困難方面，則以學生自費金額過高。三、  實施可行性建議政府編列預算，興建游泳池以利推動游泳教學；辦理教師游泳研習與認證，提高校內師資的比例；由縣府評估各校推動游泳教學之條件，訂定計畫後強制執行；由縣府提高補助經費，並獎勵績優之學校。
The main purpose of the study was to understand how elementary school in Tao-Yuan County implements swimming teaching in the current situation in their physical education class, and looking for the variation due to the different school background and method of implementation of teaching in swimming class as well as to identify the difficulties in this teaching.    The research objects was the 187 elementary schools of Tao-Yuan County and both questionnaire and visiting interview are used as the methodology of this research. According to the results of questionnaire, the data was systematically analyzed through statistic, crosstab analysis, and Chi-square test and then given the results as follow1. So far, 70.4% elementary schools in the county had adopted swimming as part of their physical education teaching in the class, over 96.5% teacher in the swimming class were external visiting swimming coaches and only 5 of the schools had their own swimming pools. Other schools used the swimming facilities which based in the local public leisure centers. Most of the runnings costs were funded partially by government subsidy and students’ payment and small percentage of schools were completely dependent on student payment. Majority of 73.5% schools promoted swimming teaching mainly due to the local government instruction, but 55.9% schools were also following the advisory from their school principal. Most of school undertakers were satisfied with the teaching of swimming class.2. The baffling factor of the implement    Place facilities aspect, such as numbers of swimming pool shortage; the teaching problem aspect, lack of relative experienced teachers; the budget problem aspect, a shortfall of government subsidy or school funding; the transportation problem aspect, traveling distance and time consuming as well as the safety of student during traveling; the lesson problem aspect, hard to make lesson arrangement; fees difficult aspect, student self-funded class leading to higher fees and costs.3. Alternative feasible suggestion    Seeking funding from government educational budget is to build swimming pools specifically for the promotion of swimming teaching; carrying out certification class for teacher is to raise the quality of swimming among sport teacher. Helpness of local council is to promote swimming teaching and convert into compulsory lesson in long term. The local government offers encouragement and funding to enhance school excellence in swimming.
