桃園縣中等學校游泳教學實施現況之研究
A Study of The Condition of Swimming Teaching of High Schools in Tao-Yuan
中等學校、游泳教學
本研究主要目的在瞭解桃園縣中等學校游泳教學實施現況；並比較不同學校背景變項與現有游泳教學資源的差異情形；以及不同學校背景變項與游泳教學實施現況的差異情形；最後為學校現有教學資源與游泳教學實施現況的差異情形。本研究對象為桃園縣中等學校84所國中、高中、完全中學及高職進行調查，採問卷調查方式。根據實際調查所得資料，以描述性統計、交叉分析、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數及Scheffe法事後比較進行分析：所得結果如下：一、  桃園縣中等學校分佈在南桃園校數高於北桃園，且多數於市區附近。學校層級以國中校數居多，且學校規模多為中、大型學校。游泳教學人力資源方面，九成以上的學校體育教師為體育科系畢業；且有九成以上學校內有游泳教學能力之健體領域教師；有八成以上學校內具合格救生員教師；另外，五成以上學校內有C級以上游泳教練證教師。二、  桃園縣中等學校游泳教學場地方面，校內有游泳池僅有9所學校，游泳池種類以室內溫水游泳池3座、室外一般6座，而9所有游泳池學校僅有8所學校實施游泳教學。游泳池全分佈於大型學校中，且公立高中、高職中有游泳池數比例較高。三、  不同學校背景變項與實施游泳教學現況在人力資源方面有顯著差異，分別為學校層級、學校區域與「校內有C級以上游泳教練證之體育教師人數」、及學校規模與「校內體育系畢業之體育教師數」。四、  不同學校背景變項與游泳教學實施現況在實施方面的差異情形，無論校內或是校外實施游泳教學，其收費情形並不受實施方式影響，有收費情況比例不高。在有實施學校中，對於實施意願皆較未實施學校高。
The main purpose of this research was to study the conduct and implement of swimming teaching in different Tao-Yuan County schools; and making comparison between these schools’ background and their present variation in term of human resource, facility and system of swimming teaching.The research was conducted by questionnaire in 84 various schools in Tao-Yuan County, including junior, senior high schools, comprehensive high schools as well as vocational high schools. According to the results of questionnaire, the data was systematically analyzed through statistic, crosstab analysis, independent sample t-test, the one –way ANOVA and the Scheffe method after the event relatively Chi-square test and then given the results as follow1. The numbers of junior high school located in southern Tao-Yuan County was higher than its northern county and majority of them were downtown nearby. Junior high schools were outnumbered the others and they tend to be medium or large school in size. In the aspect of human resource of swimming teaching, over 90% of the teachers were physical education graduated and they were also capable of gymnastic and swimming teaching. Qualified lifeguard teacher were also present in more than 80% of the schools. Furthermore, over 50% of the schools employed swimming coach teacher with at least grade C certification.2. In term of facility, only 9 schools had their own swimming pool, among them 3 were indoor pools and 6 were outdoor pools. They all had only one pool for teaching usage in each 9 schools and 8 of these schools implements swimming teaching in their class. All of the pools were located in large school and most of the pools were found both in public senior high school and vocational high school.3. In term of human resource, variable in schools background and implementation of swimming teaching had obvious difference. They can be classified according to their school class, location district and school scale respectively.4. For the facility, the variation in school background and implementation of teaching was also distinctive and they can be classified according to the school class and school scale.
