桃園縣高中職軍訓教官角色行為與工作績效之研究
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE ROLE BEHAVIOR AND WORK EFFECTIVENESS OF MILITARY INSTRUCTORS AT SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL AND VOCATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN TAUYUAN COUNTY
軍訓教官、角色行為、工作績效

本研究之目的在探討軍訓教官角色行為與工作績效關係，並了解當前學校教師對軍訓教官角色行為的認同與對其工作績效的評價程度。透過問卷調查的方式以「軍訓教官角色行為與工作績效調查問卷」為工具進行研究。針對桃園縣26所公私立高中職教師進行調查，共計發出問卷790份，有效問卷616份，有效回收率為79.5%。資料分析採用描述統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析、皮爾森相關分析與複迴歸分析等統計方法。研究發現及具體結論如下：（1）在軍訓教官角色行為上以「安全服務」被認同的程度最高，在軍訓教官工作績效上以「工作能力」與「工作表現」被評價的程度最高。（2）教師背景變項對軍訓教官角色行為與工作績效看法上有顯著差異，其中以年齡、擔任職務與學校班級數差異最為顯著。（3）在排除受訪教師基本資料的影響後，軍訓教官角色行為與工作績效具有顯著的正相關存在。（4）軍訓教官角色行為對工作績效之預測，以生活輔導預測工作態度、工作能力、工作成果與整體工作績效的效果最好，而教師對軍訓教官在安全服務的認同度則能有效預測軍訓教官的工作表現。（5）受訪教師對於軍訓教官在安全服務、學生事務與工作能力、工作表現上均呈現正面肯定的態度，尤其以有接觸學生事務之教師對於軍訓教官的肯定更甚於其他教師。（6）軍訓教官在角色行為表現上愈受到教師肯定，其對工作績效評價亦隨之提升，顯示教師對軍訓教官的角色行為的認同與工作績效的評價是相輔相成的。（7）教師對軍訓教官在生活輔導的認同程度，可以有效預測軍訓教官工作績效，其次為安全服務與國防課程的認同度。關鍵字：軍訓教官、角色行為、工作績效
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE ROLE BEHAVIOR AND WORK EFFECTIVENESS OF MILITARY INSTRUCTORS IN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL AND VOCATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AT TAUYUAN COUNTYZHUANG, MEI FENGABSTRACTThe purpose of this study was to explore the relationship between the role behavior and work effectiveness of military instructors, as well as the degree of identification and the evaluation to these factors from teachers’ points of view.  The research tool was “The Questionnaire of the Role Behavior and Work Effectiveness of the Military Instructors”, and the studied subjects were the teachers working in 26 public and private high schools and vocational schools at Tauyuan County.  Totally 790 copies of the questionnaire were distributed, and 616 valid copies collected.  The ratio of valid responded questionnaires was 79.5%.  The actual data collected were analyzed by descriptive statistics, t-test, one-way ANOVA, Product-moment correlation, and the multiple stepwise regression analysis.The findings and results of this study were as follow 1) Among the role behavior of military instructors, “service of security” got the highest identification, while “work ability” and “work performance” got the highest scores in work effectiveness.  2) There were significant differences in views of the role behavior and work effectiveness of military instructors according to teachers’ background variables, especially in “age”, “position” and ”the quantity of class in a school.”  3) After eliminating the influence of personal background factors of those interviewed teachers, there was a significant correlation between the role behavior and work effectiveness of military instructors.  4) On the prediction of work effectiveness through role behavior, using “life guidance” to predict “work attitude,” “work ability,” “work achievements” and overall “work effectiveness” had the best predictability, and the degree of identification in “service of security” the teachers held with military instructors had an effective predictability to the work effectiveness of military instructors.  5) Teachers held positive attitude toward military instructors on “service of security,” “student affairs,” “work ability” and “work performance”; especially those whose job had direct connection with “student affairs.” 6) The more positive comments the teacher gave to military instructors’ role behavior, the higher scores he/she would give to military instructors’ work effectiveness, which shows that in teachers’ points of view the role behavior and work effectiveness of a military instructor complement each other.  7) On the prediction of work effectiveness, “life guidance” was the most important factor, followed by “campus security” and “National Defense Course.”Key words military instructors, role behavior, work effectiveness
