標的產品行銷組合決策模式之廣告預算分配及訂價之研究－以臺灣茶類產品為例
A Study of a Marketing-Mix Decision Model for Allocating Advertising Budget and Pricing Target Product－An Example of Green Tea Product from Taiwan
廣告、市場區隔、決策支援系統、分析層級程序法、訂價策略、多目標規劃
面對環境快速的變化，企業想要維持其競爭優勢，必須創造更多的利潤和市場佔有率，來創造和保持顧客的來源，經營方式除了過去的生產導向、產品導向、銷售導向的思考模式外，開始邁向行銷導向的經營理念，運用行銷的方式瞭解顧客的需求，進而區分目標市場，以及將產品或服務的資訊正確傳達給真正有需求之顧客，吸引主要潛在顧客來自動購買這些產品。本研究探討之方向為期望在有限的資源下，對廣告資源規劃做最佳化的配置，企業主可運用各媒體來達到宣傳效果，拓展國內市場之範圍，進而達到行銷策略之優勢。本研究運用多目標規劃法，建立一促銷媒體及定價決策模式，並依模式之概念來建立一決策支援系統雛型，運用知名決策軟體Expert Choice及商業套裝軟體Lingo 9.0來進行數據分析，透過友善的使用者介面和互動式之操作，來求取最佳之方案解。最後，運用不同參數與腳本設定下，分析產業環境變動或決策目標改變之情況，更多的實證結果能夠推論出重要的管理涵義，以協助管理者有效地管理及掌握公司之經營策略。
Facing fast variety of environment, an enterprise must create more profits and market share for maintaining its competitive advantage and the source of customers. The operations are changed from production-, product-, or sales-oriented type to marketing -oriented type. Using several marketing methods for understanding customers' requirements, target markets are identified and then the information of products or service are correctly delivered to the right customers for attracting main potential customers to purchase all related products automatically. Under the constraints of finite advertisement resources, a media budget allocation and product pricing model is formulated in this study for optimizing various business advantages such as profit, market share, etc.A multi-objective programming is used to represent the media budget allocation and product pricing model. A prototype system based on the model is built in this study, and famous software packages Expert Choice and Lingo 9.0 are integrated and used to analyze the data and obtain the optimal planning solution interactively. Finally, under different parameter and scenario settings, several situational analyses of each enterprise’s conditions from its environment or objective are implemented. Also, some important managerial implications and guidelines are obtained from more empirical examples to help administrators effectively manage and monitor the operational strategy of each company.
