機構投資人影響個人投資者群聚行為之研究
The influence of institutional trading on the herding behavior of individual investors
機構投資人、外資、自營商、投信、群聚行為

近年來，外資因管制的開放而逐年提高其在股票市場上交易的金額。本研究探討機構投資人的交易是否會影響個人投資者後續的群聚行為。由一知名券商提供超過千萬筆個人交易明細的資料顯示，個人投資者的確會於機構投資人大幅買（賣）超後次日產生明顯的群聚現象，且此一群聚現象遠比未控制機構投資人交易前的群聚現象明顯。但是，個人的群聚現象與機構投資人買（賣）超的現象相反：當機構投資人出現大幅買（賣）超後，個人出現較為明顯的賣出（買入）群聚現象。連結交易行為與報酬的結果顯示，機構投資人大幅買超有正向報酬，而大幅買超有顯著的負向報酬，而以此形成投資策略在扣除交易成本後，可賺到顯著的正向報酬。據此推論，個人投資者對作的群聚行為會導致較差的投資績效，進一步分析，個人投資者投資策略若與機構投資人成正向操作，其扣除交易成本後的報酬率，會持續多天期。根據股票屬性切割樣本的結果發現，機構投資人與個人投資者偏好股票類型類似（成長股、大型股），導致該股票屬性的群聚現象較為顯著。在依照投資者屬性切割樣本的結果發現，男性及信用交易戶相對於女性與非信用戶的群聚現象較低，其結果符合過度自信假說的預期。
The proportion of foreign investors comprising the market trading has been increasing in the past few years. In this study we explore the issue of whether the trading of foreign investors would attract individual herding of the following day. An analysis from a dataset provided by a renowned brokerage house that covers more than ten million individual trades confirms our postulation that individual investors herd on prior big buy (sell) of institutional investors with this relationship being more prominent for foreign investors. However, individual investors herd on the opposite side of institutional trading, i.e., they exhibit a higher inclination of herding in buys (sells) following a big sell (buy) of institutional investors. The opposite herding referring to the disposition effect and attention-grabbing effect hurts individual trade returns. A trading strategy of simply buying big-buy stocks while shorting big-sell stocks of institutional investors is profitable even after transaction costs.A further analysis of this issue by segregating the sample into stock attributes and individual characteristics shows that both institutional investors as well as individual investors prefer to trade and herd on growth and large-cap stocks. Male and margin individual traders prefer to trade in herd than female and non-margin traders, respectively. The result is consistent with overconfidence hypothesis.
