比較不同口腔護理方案對氣管內管留置病患口腔黏膜改變之成效
Comparisons of different oral care protocols on oral mucosa status in patients with an endotracheal tube
口腔氣管內管留置病患、口腔護理方案、口腔黏膜改變
本研究目的主要比較不同口腔護理方案對口腔氣管內管留置病患口腔黏膜改變之成效。採類實驗研究設計（quasi-experimental research design），以立意取樣方式選取台北市某醫學中心內科加護病房共81位個案，依不同收案時間分為對照組27位、綠茶實驗組29位、開水實驗組25位，對照組僅接受常規性口腔護理，兩組實驗組則除了接受常規性口腔護理之外，並額外加上4小時一次的綠茶口腔清潔（綠茶實驗組）或開水口腔清潔（開水實驗組）。研究工具包括（1）病患資料收集表（2）口腔黏膜改變量表。資料收集採觀察法，由資深護理人員運用口腔黏膜評估量表，每天評估病患口腔粘膜狀況，共評估14天，所得資料以SPSS 12.0版及SAS 9.0版進行分析，統計方法包括描述性統計、卡方檢定、單因子變異數分析及GEE複迴歸分析。研究結果如下：一. 在14天的觀察期內，在口腔各部位所測得口腔黏膜狀況之分數平均值上，開水實驗組於唇黏膜、舌黏膜、牙齦顏色、牙齦炎、唾液狀況及口腔牙斑量狀況共六項之口腔的嚴重狀況顯著的低於對照組（p＜0.05）；而綠茶實驗組僅於唾液狀況及口腔牙斑量狀況此兩項之口腔的嚴重狀況顯著的低於對照組（P＜0.05）；二. 在顎、懸雍垂與扁桃腺窩黏膜狀況之嚴重度隨著介入後2-6天之觀察顯著高於第一天，其他部位僅有少數天數呈顯著之差異性；三.在唇黏膜變化這一單項，開水實驗組隨天數增加而有漸漸減輕之趨勢，對照組則隨天數增加而有漸漸加劇之趨勢；在牙齦顏色變化這一單項，綠茶實驗組隨天數增加而有漸漸減輕之趨勢，對照組並未隨天數增加而有趨勢變化。    以上研究結果，顯示開水實驗組的效果最好，雖然綠茶實驗組未能達到預期的效果，但是本研究證實增加口腔清潔次數可以改善口腔黏膜狀況，期望此結果能做為臨床護理人員以及醫院管理者在協助口腔氣管內管留置病患口腔護理之參考依據，以提昇口腔氣管內管留置病患之照顧品質。
AbstractThe purpose of this study was to compare the effectiveness of three different oral care protocols on oral mucosa status in patients with an endotracheal tube. A quasi-experimental design was used. The convenience samples of 81 patients with an endotracheal tube were recruited from the medical intensive care unit (ICU) of a medical center in North Taiwan. Subjects were divided into three groups based on three different admission time intervals 27 patients in the control group, 29 patients in the green-tea group, and 25 patients in the boiled-water group. Patients in the control group received only routine oral care. Patients in the experimental groups received either green-tea oral cleaning (the green-tea group) or boiled-water oral cleaning (the boiled-water group) every four hours, in addition to the routine oral care. Data were collected by observation using a structured checklist including demographic data and oral mucosa rating scale. A senior nurse assessed the subjects’ oral mucosa status everyday for 14 days. Data were analyzed by SPSS 12.0 and SAS 9.0 using descriptive statistic, chi-squar test, one way ANOVA and generalized estimation equation（GEE） multiple regression analysis. The results of this study were described as follows     1.During the 14-day period, the patients in the boiled-water group had significant lower mean score of mucosa status than those in the control group (p<0.05) on six subscales labial mucosa, tougue mucosa, gingive color, gingivitis, saliva status, and amount of dental plaque. However, the patients in the green-tea group reported signicant lower mean score of mucosa status than those in the control group on only two subscales saliva status, and amount of dental plaque.2. The mean score of mucosa status at palate, uvula, and parotid gland subscales were significant higher on the second to sixth day than the first day.                                                   3. There were interactions between groups and time on two subscales labial mucosa and gingive color. The mean score of labial mucosa subscale on the patients in the boiled-water group was graduately decreased with time, whereas those in the control group reported the opposite results. In additions, the mean score of gingive color subscale was graduately decreased with time on the patients in the green-tea group, whereas those in the control group showed no changes with time.    The results of this study confirmed that increased frequency of oral care could improve mucosa status of patients with an endotracheal tube. The effect of oral care with boiled water on mucosa status was better than green tea. Therefore, it was suggested that nurses needed to enhance their knowledge about oral care to provide more effective oral care for the ICU patients, and to prevent further infection.
