汽車用安全氣囊布料之專利及材料分析
Advanced Analysis of Airbag Fabric’s Patent and Material
安全氣囊、專利管理、塗佈布料、非塗佈布料
論文摘要汽車用安全氣囊布料之專利及材料分析(頁數：128)研究生：鄭雅鴻  指 導 教 授 ：陳省三 博士  協同指導教授：喬昭華 博士學位：理學碩士(MS)   輔仁大學織品服裝研究所  織品服飾經營與消費研究組畢業時間：民國九十四年十月十五日關鍵字：安全氣囊、塗佈布料、非塗佈布料、專利管理紡織業在台灣經濟發展過程中，長期扮演火車頭的角色，紡織品的外銷金額一向居各產業的領導地位。近年來紡織業在成本與市場因素影響下，於國內擴廠投資的意願漸漸降低，而生產設備也出現逐漸外移或出售現象，尤其下游布廠、染整產外移及關廠情況嚴重，已對我國紡織產業價值鏈的完整性造成嚴重的打擊。因此台灣整體紡織生產價值鏈的轉型升級刻不容緩，差異化纖維與產業用紡織品漸漸成為產業發展主軸。對產業用紡織品而言，汽車用材料的生產特點是高技術與專業化，尤其是安全氣囊，氣囊銷售的獨特性之一是潛在的法律責任，如失效或招致傷殘會導致法律訴訟，所以對品質測試要求更為嚴謹，因此進入門檻較高，適合擁有完整的上、中、下游供應鏈優勢之台灣紡織產業開發。因此本研究蒐集世界專利資料庫中已公告的安全氣囊的布料技術專利進行深入分析，透過專利管理面、布料技術面與市場面分析，提供國際上安全氣囊的技術發展動向與專利佈局現況。主要研究項目包含：1.專利管理面分析。2.布料的原料技術分析。3.布料的組織技術分析。4.非塗佈布料技術分析。5.塗佈布料技術分析。6.塗佈原料成分技術分析。7.環保技術分析。8.市場分析等。由本研究得知，專利數前三名的國家分別是日本(265筆)、美國(106筆)及德國(31筆)；三個國家的研發成果最亮麗，合計佔總件數88%，主導安全氣囊布料技術開發。主要競爭公司是日本「Toray」公司，專利產出75件，佔專利總數的16.4%，第二名是美國的「Milliken」公司，專利產出49件，佔專利總數的10.7%，第三名是日本「Toyobo」公司，專利產出38件，佔專利總數的8.3%。主要競爭廠商TOP 5之主要IPC分類5階分析，得知Toray 與Toyobo日本廠商主要技術在D03D01 02類(充氣織品之纖維、高密度布料)，Milliken公司與Asahi Chemical主要技術在B60R21 16類(氣袋的塗佈加工)，Dow Corning公司專長在D06N03 12(塗佈用高分子原料)。本研究除了提供國內業界進一步瞭解目前國際上安全氣囊的技術發展動向與專利佈局現況外，本研究更針對技術 功效矩陣進行深入分析；其目的在於期盼業者透過此系統化的分析，得以突破國際專利壁壘、開創技術創新進而提升產業競爭優勢。
ABSTRACTAdvanced Analysis of Airbag Fabric’s Patent and Material(Total Pages：128)AUTHOR：Ya-Hung ChengSUPERVISORS：Dr. Sheng-San Cheng and Dr. Jaw-Hua ChiaoDEGREE：MS Textiles and ClothingFu Jen Catholic UniversityGraduate Institute of Textiles and Clothing：Textiles & Fashion Business and Consumer Studies SectionDATE OF GRADUATE：15th October 2005KEY WORDS：Airbag, coating fabrics, non-coating fabrics, patent managementDuring the economic development process in Taiwan, the textile industry plays the locomotive role for a long time. The export of textiles always occupies the leading position of industries. In recent years, due to the influence of cost and market factor, the willingness for domestic factory expansion and investment in textile industry are reduced gradually. The production lines are also moved out or sold gradually. Especially hit hard are the downstream fabric and dyeing factories, so do the situation of factory change hand and shutdown is much serious. It has caused severe impact to the completeness for the value chain of textile industry in our country.So, the transformation and upgrade for the whole production value chain of textile industry is very urgent in Taiwan. The differentiated fiber and industrial textile has become the main axle of industrial development gradually. As for the industrial textile, the production feature of car material is high-tech and specialization, especially the airbag. The unique feature for the sales of airbag is the potential lawful responsibility. If it is failed or the injury is occurred, it might cause law suit. Thus the requirement for quality test is much strict. So, the entrance threshold is higher, it is suitable for the development by Taiwan textile industry, because it has complete upstream, midstream, and downstream supply chain.This study collects published airbag fabric’s patents from world patent database and conducts advanced analysis through patent management aspect, fabric technology aspect, and market aspect, so as to provide the technological development trend and patent deployment of international airbag. The major study items include 1. analysis of patent management aspect, 2. analysis of fabrics material technology, 3. analysis of fabrics weave technology, 4. analysis of non-coating fabrics technology, 5. analysis of coating fabrics technology, 6. analysis of coating material and component technology, 7. analysis of environmental protection technology, and 8. market analysis …etc.From this study, it is known that top 3 countries are Japan (265 patents), the United States (106 patents) and Germany (31 patents). The research and development achievement of these 3 countries are the best, which shares 88% of world patents and dominates the development of airbag technology. The top competitive company is Japanese “Toray”, which has 75 patents with 16.4% share of total patents. The second one is American “Milliken”, which has 49 patents with 10.7% share of total patents. The third one is Japanese “Toyobo”, which has 38 patents with 8.3% share of total patents. If 5-level IPC category is used to analyze the top 5 companies, it shows the major technology of Toray and Toyobo is D03D01 02 category (the fiber for airbag textile, high density fabrics); the major technology of Milliken and Asahi Chemical is B60R21 16 category (the coating of airbag); and the major technology of Dow Corning is D06N03 12 category (polymeric material for coating).This study not only provides the technological development trend and patent deployment of international airbag to domestic industry, but also conducts advanced analysis for its technology performance matrix. The purpose is to expect that the domestic textile enterprises can break through the barrier of international patent to create innovative technology and raise industrial competition predominance through this systematic analysis.
