流行品牌女裝延伸男裝品牌名稱不一致對消費者購買意願影響
The Effects of Incongruent Brand Name on Consumers’ Purchase.
品牌名稱、基模理論、古典制約理論、生理性別、空間色彩意象、購買意願

在全球化市場競爭激烈之下，蓬勃成長中的「都會美型男｣趨勢形成，使原本僅銷定在女性流行市場的企業，為追求銷售極大化，開始鎖定男性客層擴充男性市場。本研究所探討的主題為：流行品牌女裝延伸男裝品牌名稱不一致對消費者購買意願影響，並以「生理性別｣（男性／女性）與「空間色彩意象｣（男性化色彩／女性化色彩）做為干擾變數，探討是否對消費者購買意願產生干擾作用。研究結果發現，當品牌名稱採「適度不一致｣時，消費者購買意願最佳。且當加入「生理性別｣做為干擾變數，以了解男性與女性對購買意願的變化情形時，男性比女性更為明確受品牌名稱不一致效果影響，且其效果為「適度不一致｣購買意願大於「一致｣和「極度不一致｣。男性消費者購買意願完全驗證了Mandler(1984)「基模理論｣中所預期呈現的倒U型曲線。為更了解消費者是否受空間氣氛影響，加入空間色彩意象作為干擾變數，以了解消費者購買意願變化的情形，研究結果為消費者購買意願與空間色彩意象無太大關係。推測可能樣本部份為郵件轉寄取樣，因受測者的電腦不同而產生偏色現象，造成此效果不顯著。以上研究之結果可提供予未來企業擴充男性市場，在品牌名稱決策策略上的應用。
Under fierce competition on the global market the vigorously growing trend of ‘Metrosexual’ is changing the industry, which was before only focusing on female fashion, into an fashion industry that, pursuing bigger sales volumes, has started to focus on male fashion.The topic of this study is “The Effects of Incongruent Brand Name on Consumers Purchase” by taking ‘biological gender’ (male female) and ‘spatial color image’ (manly feminine) as interfering variables and analyzing the impact on - and interference with - the consumers buying behavior (‘Purchase Effect’).The results of this study showed that when the brand’s name was inconsistent to a certain degree, the purchasing effect was most ideal. Especially when taking the variable of biological gender in account to understand the changing purchasing effects of male and female consumers, it turned out that male buyers were even more influenced by the brand’s name (and its inconsistency) than female buyers. 　　It also showed that the purchasing effect of brand’s name being inconsistent to a certain degree was much bigger than with brands choosing to be consistent in their name that were inconsistent to a too high degree. The purchasing effect of male consumers was absolutely proven by the reverse U-shaped curve in the “Schema Theory” of Mandler (1984).To further understand if the atmosphere in a certain space has impact on the consumer’s behavior, ‘Spatial Color Image’ is used as an interfering variable. The results of the study show that this impact is rather small. It is speculated that because the samples were sent by email and the receiver computer monitors color displays vary, the results of this analysis were not very distinct.This research shall contribute to expanding the market in male fashion and can be a basis for decision-making in the branding strategy of the fashion industry.
