消費者對不同零售業的服務品質與商店形象影響購買決策之研究-以即食年菜為例
The Research of Service Quality and Store Image of Retailing on Consumer Purchasing Decision-Example of Takeout Ready to Eat Meal in Chinese New Year Feast
服務品質、商店形象、購買決策、即食年菜
即食年菜產品的銷售由市場所反應的熱烈程度與市場趨勢來看，將是一股新興的市場商機。若能瞭解消費者對於即食年菜產品的要求，有助於日後的銷售與經營。故此，本研究將以消費者觀點檢視目前市面上由便利商店、超市以及量販店等三大零售通路業者所銷售的即食年菜產品，探討各通路業者的服務品質與商店形象是否會影響消費者對於即食年菜的購買決策。本研究資料收集的方式採取以立意抽樣方式進行樣本抽樣，並以結構式問卷獲得消費者對即食年菜的觀點。本研究抽樣範圍以台北縣市之消費者為抽樣對象，共發出問卷600份，經資料整核後實得有效問卷476份。本次研究所得結果歸納如下：一、消費者的人口統計變數對服務品質與商店形象有影響。二、服務品質與商店形象有相關性。三、消費者人口統計變數對購買意願、購買金額之數量與購買通路之選擇有影響。四、服務品質與商店形象對於消費者之購買通路選擇與購買金額數量有影響。五、消費者對於三大通路業者在提供即食年菜上的服務品質與商店形象之看法，分別為：  1.量販店業者在服務品質上應該注意有形性的影響，而商店形象部份，則是應注意商品    特質上的表現。  2.超市業者應重視服務品質的保證性，在商品形象部份，則可重視即食年菜的商品特    質。  3.便利商店業者未來在服務品質上應該著重有形性，而商店形象方面則應以商品特質做    為修正的重心。
In recently, the sale of the takeout Chinese lunar year feast grows gradually up.There are three kinds of channels about the sale of the takeout Chinese lunar year feast at present.This study wanted to know whether the service quality and store image of the different channels affect the purchasing behavior of the takeout Chinese lunar year feast. The samples of this study were from Taipei County and City. The questionnaires were sent 600 people for survey 476 responses were valid data. The research results as follows 1.The demographical variables affect the service quality and store   image. 2.The service quality and the store image are correlation. 3.The demographical variables affect the purchasing intension,   purchasing amount and the choice of the purchasing channel. 4.The service quality and the store image affect the purchasing   amount and the channel choice. 5.The views of consumer about the different channel as follows   a.The merchandise stores should strengthen the visibility of the     service quality; should strengthen the product characteristic     of the store image.   b.The supermarket should strengthen the guarantee of the service     quality.In the viewpoint of store image, it should strengthen     the product characteristic in the store image.   c.The convenient stores should strengthen the visibility of the     service quality; should focus on the product characteristic of     the store image.
