混合信用評分與評等制度之研究-以國內某金融機構為例
A Research of the Credit Scoring and Rating Combined System of the Fiduciary Loan - With a commercial bank in Taiwan as an Example
小額信用貸款、違約機率、信用評分、信用評等
在競爭激烈的消費金融市場中，金融機構皆採取寬鬆的授信政策搶攻消金市場，此舉雖創造高額的利潤，但也產生許多的呆帳。為了降低逾放比率及信用風險，金融機構紛紛建立審核制度，眼看國內金融機構將在2006年底開始執行新巴賽爾協定，更應妥善控管風險，以符合國際風險管理的準則。本研究運用國內某家金融機構於九十二年六月至民國九十三年六月的小額信貸客戶資料，共計10,285筆，進行分析，首先挑出對目標變數（是否壞帳）具有影響力之變數，透過變數組合，以Logistic Regression建立各個違約風險評估模型，並比較各模型之相關訊息，以期找出最佳評估模型，最後在依模型計算的違約機率將顧客分等，並定義不同等級之信用分數區間及探討不同等級之顧客特性。研究結果顯示，經由ROC圖、訊息測量指標及預測能力綜合比較選出最適模型為模型一，接著對此模型進行變數縮減，以縮減後的變數建立模型五，並與模型一再進行比較後，最後決定出以模型五為本研究之最佳模型。建構最佳模型（模型五）的變數，為「性別」、「學歷」、「長期放款現欠金額比率」、「現金卡張數」、「短期還款比例」五個變數，及信用分數切點為780.86分，其整體正確率為75.95%。最後依模型所計算出的顧客違約機率，透過集群分析將顧客風險層級分為10個等級，並定義各等級之信用分數區間及探討不同等級之顧客特性，使金融機構更有效率地加強其風險控管及了解顧客的特性，進而完善其顧客關係管理系統。
In the competitive consumption financial market, financial institutions have long been adopting a wide accredit policy to occupy the consumer financial market. Although this policy has created high profits, it has also brought much default. Domestic financial institutions will execute the Basel II Convention by the end of 2006, so they must control risk well in order to be in compliance with the criteria of international risk management.In this research, data of 10,285 customers of small fiduciary loan from a commercial bank in Taiwan were collected from the period of June 2003 to June 2004. Variables that had significant influences on default were first chosen, and then through variables combination, default risk models were established and assessed with Logistic Regression.After comparing ROC curves, information measures and the predictability of each model, “model one” was found to be the most suitable model. Followed by this finding, variables were further reduced to build “model five”. These two models were then compared and analyzed. As a final result,“model five”was determined to be the best model by the definition of this research.In model five, the five important variables are “gender”, “education”, “long term release credit account ratio”, “the number of cash cards”, and “short term discount bond ratio”. The cut point of credit score is 780.86 and the overall percentage of accuracy is 75.95%.Based on the customer default probability evaluated by this model, and through cluster analysis, customer risks were divided into 10 grades. The research not only defined the credit score interval of each grade, but also discussed the characteristics of customers from different grades. It is hoped that the result yield by the research will enable financial institutions to strengthen their risk control efficiently, to realize the characteristics of customers, and to perfect their customer relationship management system.
