災後重建資源規劃智慧型決策模式之研究
A Study of Intelligent Resource Allocating Decision Model of Recovery PlanningIn a Disaster Reconstruction
災後重建管理、資源分配、決策支援系統、多目標規劃、分析層級法
人類能力控制範圍外、且具有時間不定與不可預測性的災害事件陳出不窮，在預防機制不足已抵抗外力時，最後的防堵只能靠消極的重建與恢復；也因此本研究所著重的議題，多災點式的災後重建資源規劃，提出如何在固定資源條件、以及資源空間分散以及時效性考量之特性下，協助決策人員評估受災區、納入時間因素以及讓資源充分配置的需求，充分且適當的將重建任務中的資源種類與數量作一較具科學性的規劃動作，不僅如此，該解決方案定位於處理長期、非單一時點的資源規劃決策。本研究以文獻蒐集並透過建構分析層級法(analytic hierarchy process, AHP)協助判斷災害區的受災嚴重性，並將災後重建需求、資源數量、資源與災區分布、運送時間等因素納入其中，以線性規劃(linear programming, LP)方法建構滿足多目標決策條件的數學模式，透過商業軟體LINGO9.0進行資源配置的最適解產出，茲提供決策者資源規劃的協助。除此，透過該解決方案架構為基礎，以雛型法建構一以網路為基(web-based)的災後重建資源規劃平台，試以驗證理論原則下的正確性與準確度；最後，透過管理分析方法中的若則分析(What-if analysis)針對災後重建資源規劃模式中的各重要參數設計，進行數據模擬、微調並觀察，試圖說明模式發展所具備的管理意涵，作為提升決策品質與縮短決策時間的依據。
Due to disasters with short cycle and increasingly unpredictable, the preventing mechanisms do not work insufficiently, and the only way is to rely on reconstruction and recovery system. Thus, this study focuses on the recovery planning for different disaster areas caused by the calamity. By combining information technology and quantitative method, a decision model is developed in this study to help decision-makers judge the priority of severity about disaster areas, allocate proper number of resources from resources providers to disaster areas under the conditions that resources are limited and the space is scattered. Moreover, the recovery plan is set as a long-term process of interactive decision making, not the one time only.As describe earlier, the critical factors are found out from literature reviews and then are used to construct the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), which is a kind of multiple criteria decision making method in order to helps decision-makers judge the priority of severity and obtain the weight of each disaster area. Several kinds of data, such as resource demand of each disaster area, resource supply of each provider, distribution and routing time from sources to destinations, etc. are offered in a prototype system. A multi-objective recovery and allocation decision model is solved by using parameters mentioned above and famous software Lingo 9.0 for effectively and optimally allocating resources of recovery planning in a disaster reconstruction. Further, evolutionary prototyping method is used for developing a web-based prototype system for managerial analysis.Finally, several experimental designs and simulations settings are implemented for obtaining some management implications and guideline. What-if analysis from our model can improve decision quality and shorten the time in the decision-making process.
