營造工程物價指數趨勢預測之研究－以基因演算法與反轉點模式分析
Forecast for trend of the Construction Cost Index--based on Genetic Algorithm and Invert Model Analysis
基因演算法、營建物價指數
營建物價指數除具有調整工程款的功能，也代表營建工程所需材料與人工的市場價格。若能掌握未來物價趨勢，對政府機關而言可以判斷工程單價是否合宜，對中小型營造商而言，可事先評估損益，再決定是否參與競標。營建物價指數的重要性不言可喻，本研究的目的在研究營建物價指數的趨勢與變動，以基因演算法為主架構配合4個股市常用技術指標，推導未來營建物價趨勢及趨勢反轉點。     資料來源為主計處90.01至94.10之106項公告之查價項目價比與權重資料，推估過程首先利用取得之資料建立推估指數模式，再進一步將變數由106項縮減至14個工程上常用的項目，修正後計算模式誤差百分比為4﹪~7﹪完成指數推估模式。而趨勢推估模式，則將指數模式計算所得資料利用股市常用的4種指標，計算其長短期數線的離差值，再由離差值的斜率變化找出營建物價指數的變動行為模式、利用趨勢線、指數平滑等步驟，完成合成趨勢線及趨勢區間，再由合成趨勢線進行推估營建物價指數趨勢及反轉點，此方式得到之反轉點推估值比公告值約慢2~3個月。     本研究計算模型發現：指數是可經由較簡易及少量資料加以推估且誤差範圍僅4.83﹪，由於選用之演算法簡便易用並可直接引用Excel數據，大幅降低建制與訓練成本，使得單一機構建立專有的分析模式變得可行。經由分析過程可知，若將模式稍加變更計算的查價項目與參數，亦可推廣至其他分類指數，供營建業不同領域的需求。
In addition to represent the price for construction materials and labors, Construction Cost Index (CCI) provides with the function to adjust outlays for constructions in progress.  Forecasting for price trend of construction materials and labors provides information not only for government organizations to evaluate reasonableness of outlays of public constructions, but also for small and medium construction firms to measure profit of constructions.  Although CCI is a key indicator for construction cost and government organizations, the authoritative forecasting for CCI is deficient.  To this end, the study integrate Gene Algorithm(GA) and invert model analysis which is in common use for security markets to develop methodology for forecasting CCI trend and reverse point by application of Microsoft Excel extra gene algorithm module-Evolver.     Due to lack original transaction data, the study adopts the price and weight data from January 2001 to October 2005 for 106 construction material and labor items proclaimed by Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics.  To develop the forecasting methodology, the study follows the several steps including diminishing the range of items from 106 items to 14 common use items, setting computing rules and limitation terms for gene algorithm, building index computing models, computing trend baseline of CCI, building interval of trend baseline of CCI.     The result, that error of CCI between 106 items and 14 items is within 4.83%, shows that the methodology is helpful to simplify collecting data and computing index.  Without the difficulty of gene algorithm, application of Evolver is so easy to use that the cost of forecasting is very low and suit for small and medium construction firms.  Besides, the methodology can be applied to fit forecasting needs in other fields by modifying price items and parameters.
