獨立董監事辭職之決定因素與股價反應
The Determinant Factors and The Stock Price of Independent Director and Supervisor resigned
獨立董監事、公司治理、辭職、公司特性

本研究的研究目的係從公司經營績效好壞、公司風險大小與公司治理風險高低等特性探討上市（櫃）公司獨立董監事辭職的因素，及探討宣告獨立董監事辭職時股價反應與影響股價反應的因素，以91年2月至95年1月間初次申請股票上市（櫃）之公司於期間中有宣告獨立董監事辭職者為研究樣本，無獨立董監事辭職者為配對樣本，並以在公開資訊觀測站發布時間作為辭職的宣告日，共取得82個樣本。實證結果發現：1.相對於配對樣本獨立董監事辭職公司，其公司特性為經營績效較差（資產報酬率較低）、公司風險較大（稅前息前盈餘變異係數、財務槓桿比率較大）、公司治理風險較高（關係人交易比率較高、會計師出具查核意見非為無保留意見、家族企業色彩濃厚、大股東持股比率較高）。2.在不同的公司特性作用下，資產報酬率、稅前息前盈餘變異係數、關係人交易比率、會計師出具查核意見非為無保留意見、董事長兼任總經理、大股東持股比率呈現顯著影響獨立董監事辭職的決定。3.當公司宣告獨立董監事辭職時，所產生的累積平均異常報酬率呈現不顯著的負向反應，無法說明辭職事件對公司股價有顯著負面影響，可能是因為投資人對於獨立董監事之名詞尚未熟稔，且其是否能發揮監督功能仍抱著存疑的態度，故無法及時作出正確的反應。另外，發現集中交易市場有消息外漏現象存在。4.會計師查核意見與累積平均異常報酬率呈顯著正相關，顯示發生獨立董監事辭職公司，其會計師出具財務報告查核意見為無保留意見，可能隱含公司財務報表透明度不高或公司管理當局與簽證會計師共謀而有窗飾財務報表的可能性，使得投資人面對此一不合理情形產生困惑，因而造成所產生的累積平均異常報酬率較少。
The purpose of this study is to examine the determinants of independent directors and supervisors’ resignation in listed and OTC companies from the dimensions of corporate performance, operation risks and corporate governance risk. This study also investigates the stock price reaction and the factors influencing the price reaction when the company announces the resignation of independent directors or superiors. The sample includes 82 resigned announcements of the independent director or supervisor form February 2002 to January 2006. The announcement date of independent directors’ or supervisors’ resignation is got from the Market Observation Post System.The empirical results are summarized as follows1. Comparing with matching sample, the companies of independent director or supervisor resigned have worse corporate performance (lower ROA), greater operation risks (larger coefficient of variation of earning before interest tax, financial leverage ratio) and higher corporate governance risk (higher the related party transaction ratio, audit opinion is other than unqualified opinion, more family firms, the more shareholding owned by the large shareholder).2. Based on the different corporate characteristics, ROA, coefficient of variation of earning before interest tax, the related party transaction ratio, audit opinion is other than unqualified opinion, the Chairman and the CEO as the same person, the shareholdings owned by the large shareholder affect the decision of independent directors’ or supervisors’ resignation.3. The cumulative average abnormal return is no significant negative reaction when the company announces independent directors’ or supervisors’ resignation. This can’t explain that the resigned event affects the stock price negatively. The possible reason is that investors aren’t familiar with independent directors’ or supervisors’ functions and have doubts their subversion effectiveness. Therefore, the investors may not do the correct reaction immediately. In addition, we find that news are leaked out in the market in advance.4. Auditing opinion is positively related to the cumulative average abnormal return. In companies with independent directors or supervisors resigning, when accountant audit opinion is other than unqualified opinion in the independent or supervisor resigned company, it implies that financial report transparency is not good enough or the management and accountant may window dress the financial reports. Investors are confused in this unreasonable situation. That is why the cumulative average abnormal return is lower.
