理財商品決策因素之研究
A Study on Decision Factors of financial goods
理財商品決策因素、層級程序分析法、參照單位分析
在理財觀念盛行且理財商品眾多的情況下，理財致富已經成為趨勢，而理財者要如何在複雜的理財市場裡作出合適的決策，是一個非常重要的議題。本研究為瞭解專業理財人員在進行理財決策所考量之因素，利用問卷調查大台北地區商業銀行的理財人員，共計回收69份有效問卷。利用集群分析、層級程序分析法及參照單位分析探討不同族群重視的決策因素及理財行為。其研究結果如下：（一）  理財人員按人口統計分為兩特性不同的族群。（二）  理財人員在進行理財決策時重視的因素依序為獲利性、安全性及流動性，且認為報酬率、投資規模及市場景氣是非常重要的評估準則。（三）  第一群理財人員對於存款、基金及股票皆非常熟悉，而對期貨及黃金最不瞭解；第二群理財人員則對存款與基金較瞭解，而較不了解房地產、期貨、外匯、黃金及債券等商品。（四）  就理財用途而言，第一群理財人員對生活保障及退休金的需求程度高，而第二群理財人員則對生活保障、退休金及提高生活品質的需求程度較高。兩群受訪者對購買動產的需要程度皆為最低。
Because of the knowledge of wealth management and lots of existing financial products, knowing how to make money in this financial world becomes a trend. It is an important issue for investors to know how to make a good decision within a complicated financial market.In order to understand what factor is important for Financial Consultants managing finances, questionnaire survey about Financial Consultants of commercial banks in Taipei.  Responses of 69 questionnaires were statistically analyzed by Cluster analysis, Analytical Hierarchy Process and Relative to an Identified Distribution.  The survey results are obtained as below：1.  Financial Consultants are divided into two groups by their demographic characteristics.2.  When making wealth management decisions, the key determinants that Financial Consultants focus on are Profitability, Default Risk, and Liquidity. Also, returns, portfolio, and market condition are considered critical valuation factors.3.  Financial Consultants in the first group are familiar with Deposits, Funds, and Stocks but are not familiar with Futures and Gold. Financial Consultants in the second group are familiar with Deposits and Funds but are not familiar with Real Estates, Futures, Foreign Currency, Gold and Securities.4.  As far as purpose of wealth management be concerned, Financial Consultants in the first group think wealth management as the most needed in living expense and retirement pensions. Financial Consultants in the second group think wealth management as the most needed in living expense, retirement pensions, and increasing living standards. All Financial Consultants think buying real estates as the least needed.
