用哲學諮商方法論兩性關係
Philosophical Counseling be Applied to The Relationship of Men and Women
哲學諮商、兩性關係、男女、婚姻、西撒法
一九八一年，德國哲學家吉德．阿肯巴哈（Gerd Achenbach）創設了第一個哲學諮商中心，並將哲學諮商開闢成為一種運動，自此開始「哲學諮商」 ( Philosophical Counseling )這個名詞正式在歐洲出現。哲學諮商( Philosophical Counseling )的理論在精神治療（Psychiatry）和心理諮商（Psychical Counseling）還沒有成形之前，可以說是除了宗教之外最能助人的學科，但在近代各種發展理論都已有長足進步外，哲學諮商的理論並未因此稍停其腳步，祇是它所使用的方法可能和精神治療和心理諮商的方法不完全相同，哲學諮商是讓當事人（the client）「有能力和有意願去學習」。因此，哲學諮商被認為在幫助當事人「瞭解他的困境或生活，並且展開可以讓他成長的廣闊空間」。所以，哲學諮商是將哲學知識以及專家意見應用到真實的生活狀態中，目的是在於使一個人的身心靈更趨於完整。不可否認的，哲學諮商實踐再次顯現出哲學的真正價值。此篇論文選擇以黎建球所提出的哲學諮商方法--西撒法（CISA）來作為探討兩性關係的研究進路，論文中探討失戀、婚姻失和等兩性主要面對的課題。
In 1981, the German philosopher, Gerd Achenbach, established the first philosophical counseling center, and made this kind of philosophical business become a movement. From then, the noun—Philosophical Counseling officially appeared in Europe. Before the forming of the so-called Psychiatry and Psychical Counseling, the theory of Philosophical Counseling may say to be the most helpful subjects besides religions. Being similar with the great development of all kinds of modern developing-theories, the theory of Philosophical Counseling also makes progress at its own paces. Different from Psychiatry and Psychical Counseling, the Philosophical Counseling let the clients be capable and willing to learn. Therefore, the philosophy consults business is considered as a method which can help the clients come to an understanding of their predicament or life and unfold the broader horizons toward which they can grow. As a result, Philosophical Counseling aims to perfect human beings’ mental and physical situations through implying the knowledge of philosophy and the experts’ advice in their real life. Undeniably, the practice of Philosophical Counseling testifies the deepest value of philosophy to us again. In this essay, I choose to use the method of philosophical counseling--CISA which is claimed by Bernard Li as a gateway to explore the study of the relationship of men and women. This essay explores the mainly issues of the two genders, such as a failure in love and conjugality.
