研究以垂直及傾斜入射光線監控真空鍍膜的光學多層膜成長
Study of deposition of optical multi-films with vertical and oblique incidence monitoring system
光學監控系統、垂直光學監控、斜向光學監控、設計波長、自我補償、離子源助鍍
中文摘要    光學監控系統是鍍製多層膜時，最常用的監控方法。一般真空系統中的光學監控系統大都是以垂直入射的光線做穿透式或反射式的光學監控。然而，部份多層膜是設計為光線傾斜入射時使用。而垂直光學監控並無法針對斜向入射多層膜的設計波長做直接監控，必須經過計算修正監控波長後才能做監控，這樣已經失去了光學監控對設計波長做直接監控的優點。本論文在垂直光學監控系統中，再加一道傾斜入射的光線做斜向入射的反射式光學監控，對多層膜的設計波長做直接監控，以及修正設計波長做垂直監控。選擇兩個多層膜：窄帶濾光片、截止濾光片，以斜向監控與垂直監控做製鍍。從兩種監控方法模擬的導納圖、光譜圖以及實驗的光譜圖中，發現斜向光學監控，對於整體膜層監控的準確性和光學監控自我補償的特性都比垂直監控好，且膜層數愈多時，斜向光學監控的優勢愈明顯。最後對於實驗的光譜圖，因為水氣的吸收而往長波飄移問題，使用離子源助鍍做改善。發現使用離子源助鍍後的確能夠減少水氣的吸收，減少光譜圖的飄移。
AbstractOptical monitor system is often used to monitor optical multi-layers coating by measuring the transmittance or reflectance of light at vertical incidence in vacuum system.  However, some optical monitors are designed to use oblique incident light. Since the vertical incident light can’t be directly used to monitor the reference wavelength designed for the thin film and hence the monitoring wavelength has to be corrected before monitoring. However, this wavelength correction to the designed wavelength minimizes the advantage of direct-monitoring in optical monitoring system.In this study, other than vertical incident light an oblique incident optical monitoring with reflectance is added to monitor the designed wavelength.  Moreover, the corrected reference wavelength for the multi-layers is still used at vertical optical monitoring. Two kinds of multi-layers designs, band-pass filter and edge filter, are chosen as instances in this study. It was found that the oblique monitoring is better than that in vertical monitoring according to the simulated admittance, simulated spectrum and experimental spectrum, due to the accuracy of self-compensation in all optical coating monitoring processes. Furthermore, the more deposited layers, the better the oblique monitoring. Finally, the spectrum shift decreases with ion-assisted deposition (IAD) used in experiments, because of the decrease in water vapor absorption.
