策略性核心職能辨認模式建構－價值活動與流程分析導向
Establishing Strategic Core Competency Identification Model－Value Activity and Process Analysis Oriented
核心職能、核心職能辨認模式、價值活動分析、流程分析
人力資源管理理念受人力資本概念之影響，附著於人員身上之才能/職能成為關注焦點。「職能」的概念從個人學習績效的評估串聯到企業策略與競爭力的發展，加上企業策略分析模式由環境基礎漸轉向資源基礎，組織內成員能力基礎，影響著企業策略的落實。愈能辨認與掌握本身核心職能之組織愈具未來之競爭優勢，更讓核心職能成為討論內部資源累積的重要標的，同時也形成人力資源與組織策略聯結之新契機。此理念基礎的轉變，正全面重塑企業所建立之各項管理制度的風貌，如何為組織辨認其核心職能，也成為亟待回答的問題。本研究企圖建構一兼具策略性理論及實務性操作意涵之核心職能辨認模式，以回應趨勢之需求。    本研究根據模式建立之過程，分別以核心職能影響因素、策略思維體系、核心職能理念、價值活動與流程分析手法、策略性核心職能辨認模式之建構與評估，五個構面加以分析。首先整備核心職能之知識內容結構與脈絡體系，提供一個完整之理念聯結平台，再透過策略思維體系之環境基礎及資源基礎思維的引導，及實際操作之價值活動及流程步驟分析的型塑，順著既有理論之演繹邏輯，及現場個案實作資料之歸納推演，以啟發式之創意思維，及實作式的經驗探索，完成策略性核心職能辨認模式之建構與評估並發展其應用之相關概念及原則。    本研究以整合之觀點，將由上而下之策略思維以及由下而上之流程分析予以統整，提出以價值活動及流程分析導向之策略性核心職能辨認模式，大不同於傳統以人員主觀與意見調查為導向之模式。新建構之模式除兼具兩種策略思維之優點，同時亦整合多個知識領域之理念，其建構過程中也達成包括：釐清核心職能之概念並形成其知識體系、完備操作核心職能辨認模型的標準流程及工具箱、提供運用核心職能辨認模式之指導原則等目標，有效地補實目前之理論缺口，更滿足了實務引導之需要。
The importance of human capital is highly recognized by both academician and filed people for its crucial impact on demonstrating companies’ competitive advantage in nowadays. The core competency is the major substantial concept to reflect the inventory of human capital; therefore, exploring defining and solidifying those competencies will profoundly affect the performance of a company. Though the concrete idea is thoroughly accepted, the best practice and sound theory base has not been investigated.    The research intends to establish a strategic core competency identification model which not only integrates the related domain knowledge including strategy management, human resource management and operations management, but also developed the tools to bridge the gap between theory and practice. By reviewing the existing literature and employing the heuristic thinking approach, the research not only sets up a knowledge map for core competency but also establishes a conceptual framework to analyze the related constructs. Furthermore, procedural model of implementations is hence developed with comprehensive tool box based on the map and framework depicted.    Comparing with existing identification model, this research puts more emphasis on the value activity and process analysis which is the main technique to improve the competitiveness. It will obviously increase the objectivity and stability of the output in this new developed model. Three companies were hereafter sampled and testified against the suggested model. It is proved that these three case companies can obtain the core competency model with high consensus smoothly. The impact factors of selecting core competency items for a company were also comprehensibly examined and ranked by invited experts. These outputs provide some rules to apply the model more properly. The propositions were also proposed after collecting data from the selected cases which can lead the direction of future studies. The implications of the research on human resource management and strategy management were finally discussed and the issues of future research were indicated as well.
