米漿黏度對發糕質地與體積之影響
Effect of Batter Viscosity on the Texture and Volume of Leaven Rice Cake
米漿、黏度、發糕、質地、體積
本研究主要探討米漿黏度與膨脹型米食體積與質地之相關性，並以發糕為膨脹米食樣本。首先選用TNuS 19、TCS 17、TG 9試製發糕，並擇一最適米種進行沸水沖入米漿；或用添加三仙膠（xanthan gum）及麵粉取代部份白米等增稠方法。經處理後之米糊，分別測定比重、黏度與擴散黏度值，並利用質地輪廓分析及官能品評，測定發糕之硬度、內聚性、膠性及彈性等，再分別探討米糊黏度與發糕體積及質地之相關性。結果顯示，米種會影響發糕品質。以同屬高直鏈澱粉含量、硬凝膠的秈米：TNuS 19與TCS 17所製之發糕，體積皆大，質地鬆軟，又以TNuS 19效果最佳，故TNuS 19為製作發糕之最適米種。至於低直鏈澱粉含量、軟凝膠之稉米：TG 9，發糕體積小，質地黏膩，並不適合發糕製作。以TNuS 19所製傳統之發糕米糊，黏度約362 c.P.，經這些加工處理，黏度皆增加3~10 倍。添加0.2 %三仙膠，黏度值上升10 倍（約3700 c.P.），發糕體積及裂紋均最大，質地鬆軟細緻，且老化速率最慢，為大眾喜愛，品質最佳。其餘三種處理，沖沸水者，黏度上升4倍（約1500 c.P.），質地亦鬆軟，品質次佳；20 %麵粉取代者，米糊上升3倍（約1100 c.P.），為上升輻度最小者，所製發糕顏色黃，質地雖軟，但不受大眾喜愛。此外，米糊黏度與發糕體積與比體積具正相關（r =0.72-0.89），但與發糕質地具部分相關。又布氏黏度計所測得之米糊黏度（c.P.）與簡易擴散黏度計測定30 s、60 s流動距離之相關性皆高（r= -0.95），故未來可提供業界量產時，以簡易型擴散黏度計測量米糊黏度，預測及提高此類產品品質。
The correlation between batter viscosity, and volume or texture of rice leavened cake was studied. Rice samples of TCS17, TNuS19 and TG9 were used to make rice leaven cakes, and the most adequate rice was selected to process batter viscosity-increasing treatments. Increasing of  batter viscosity was accomplished by adding boiling water into slurry, pre-gelatinizing the rice slurry in an 80 ℃ water bath for 20 min, adding xanthan gum, or replacing 20 %(w w) rice by wheat flour. Density, viscosity and flow properties were determined using Brookfield viscometer and Bostwick consistometer, production of bubble was observed by hot stage microscopy. Also, hardness, cohesiveness, gumminess, resilience of the final products were analyzed by Texture Profile Analysis (TPA) and sensory evaluation.    Results indicated that quality of rice leaven cake was affected by rice variety. Rice leaven cakes from rice (both TNuS 19 and TCS 17) with high amylose content and hard consistency showed greater volume and softer texture, and leavened rice cake made from TNuS 19 had the best qualities. Conversely, TG 9 rice, characterized as low amylose content and soft gel consistency, was not appropriate to make rice leaven cake, according to the smaller volume and higher adhesive of its final product.    Among the three varieties studied, the TNuS 19 was the most suitable sample for producing leavened rice cakes, however, the viscosity of batter from this rice was low. The viscosity could be increased 3-10 folds after viscosity-increasing treatment. Ten-fold of viscosity-increasing  was achieved in the presence of 0.2 % xanthan gum, this lead to the highest volume and largest crack, smaller pores on surface, softer texture, and slower staling rate, thus, the best quality was obtained. The addition of boiling water to slurry, viscosity of batter was found to increase 4-fold. The highest crack starting temperature, the longer lag time, and soft texture of leavened rice cake were observed, the quality was second to the best. Using 20 % wheat flour to replace rice, 3-fold increasing in batter viscosity was observed. Quality of this product was found to be soft texture and light yellow appearance. The staling rate was slower than that of control, and resulted in product of poor quality.    Moreover, the correlation coefficients between viscosity and volume or specific volume of rice leaven cake were 0.72-0.89. This reveals that the greater viscosity the larger volume of leavened rice cake. However, no significant correlation between viscosity and texture parameters was found. Correlations between batter viscosity determined by Brookfield viscometer and flow distance measured by Bostwick consistometer for 30 s 60 s were high(r=-0.95). Conclusively, the present study provides a reference for industrial production evaluation of leavened rice cake  through the determination of viscosity, volume and texture.
