組織資源、組織特性對新產品開發績效之研究－以台灣紡織業為例
The Relationship Between Organizational Resources, Characteristics, and New Product Development Performance Evidences from the Taiwanese Textile Industry
組織資源、組織特性、新產品績效
論文摘要組織資源、組織特性對新產品開發績效之研究－以台灣紡織業為例                                                        （頁數：73頁）研究生：沈之湄                        指導教授：蔡淑梨博士、廖國鋒博士學位：理學碩士（MS）畢業時間：中華民國九十四年七月二十一日輔仁大學織品服裝研究所織品服飾經營與消費研究組關鍵詞：組織資源、組織特性、新產品績效    自1985起，資源基礎理論便成為策略管理新興的觀點。資源基礎論的重點在於辨識、澄清、培植及發展組織獨特的資源，連結公司的競爭優勢與策略，以維持企業長期的競爭優勢。    以紡織產業來分析，台灣紡織業早期單靠低價及追求規模經濟、大量生產之策略已逐漸失去其有效性。此外，有鋻於紡織品原料、圖案、款式生命週期縮短趨勢，廠商只有以快速、有彈性、高度服務之經營方式始能繼續保持企業之蓬勃發展。    本研究以台灣以紡織業為研究母體，但為符合本研究之研究主題，設定研究對象為「有新產品開發的紡織產業廠商」。研究結果顯示：H1：組織資源對新產品績效之互動關係，結果顯示組織資源對新產品績效有正向影響為部分成立，在組織能力及與個人能力有正向影響是成立，而對有形資產與無形資產不顯著，故不成立。H2：組織特性對新產品績效之互動關係，結果顯示組織特性對新產品績效有正向影響為部分成立，結果顯示組織特性的成立時間對無形資產呈現正相關；對組織能力呈現負相關。組織特性的組織規模對組織能力呈現負相關。其餘假設皆不成立。    研究最終也就如何增進新產品開發績效提出相關建議並作為行銷者擬定策略之參考依據。
AbstractThe Relationship Between Organizational Resources, Characteristics, and New Product Development Performance Evidences from the Taiwanese Textile Industry(Pages 73)AuthorSupervisor Dr. Su-Lee Tsai and Dr. Gou-Fong LiawDegree MS Textile and ClothingFu Jen Catholic UniversityGraduate Institute of Textile and ClothingTextiles/Fashion Business and Consumer Studies SectionDate of Graduation July 21, 2005Keywords Organizational Resources, Organizational Characteristics, New Product Development PerformanceThe primary purpose of this article is to propose a relationship framework between organizational resources, characteristics, and new product development performance from the base of resource-based view. Since 1985, the resource-based view has become burgeoning and now is the most popular analytical instrument in the category of strategic management. This theory accentuates that companies could establish competitive advantages through identifying, clarifying, cultivating their individual resources and make these resources fine connection to maintain competitivity.From the past forty years, the Taiwanese textile industry has contributes to the national foreign exchange greater than the trade surplus, and has become the most important making foreign exchanges industry in Taiwan. But those strategies which textile firms have dependent on have suffered serious setbacks. Besides, the modern consumption trends have curtail the life cycles of textile materials, fabrics and products, so these textile firms have continually to transform their business manner into quick response, high elasticity and service-oriented to preserve vigorous competences.This research constructs two main hypotheses and carries testing out. There are obvious positive relationships between organizational resources, characteristics and new product development performance. Besides, there are some different explanations in the variables of the organizational resources. The organizational capability and individual capability hold the positive relationship, but the visible and intangible assets do not work significantly. Two hypotheses hold negative relationship, one is between organizational age and capacity and another is between organizational size and capacity.Finally, this research mentions some suggestions for marketing managers and researchers about how to improve new product development performance and to perform further study.
