結構型金融商品課稅制度之探討
Taxation of Structured Financial Products
稅制、結構型債券、綜合所得稅、競爭力、屬地主義

風險管理的創新是衍生性金融商品演進的中心主題，創新性金融工具最初的目的即是風險配置，以因應投資人之風險管理需求。面對創新性金融商品不斷地推陳出新且內容愈趨複雜，所得稅制度受到極大的挑戰。尤為甚者，國內個人綜合所得稅制度以屬地主義為基礎，且證券交易所得稅15年來停徵情況下，扭曲稅制目標的中立及公平性，呈現「一商品，一稅制」的現象，亦即相同投資目的，因不同發行單位、以不同型態發行，或於不同地區發行卻有不同課稅規定，使發行者及投資者有租稅規避之誘因，將資金移往具競爭性的商品或海外地區，稅制的核心問題影響我國金融市場的競爭力。此外，由於稅務法令常跟不上創新性金融商品的發展速度，導致許多定義上的分歧與規範的不夠明確，使徵納雙方產生對立情形。如何對結構型商品課徵以兼顧金融發展與租稅公平，成為本文的研究主軸。
The increasing popularity of innovative financial transactions in recent years is primarily due to the need for risk management by businesses and financial investors alike and the development of sophisticated instruments tailored to meet such demands. By its very nature, financial innovation also presents great challenges to systems of taxation.Furthermore, the Individual Income tax system in Taiwan is based on the Territoriality Principle, and taxes on gains derived from securities transactions are “temporarily” suspended for more than 15 years.  As a result, the neutrality and equity goals of the tax system are inevitably distorted and the inconsistent phenomenon of “one item one rule” is prevalent.  For the same investment purpose but with different issuers and different product names, or originated from different geographical areas, the methods and rates of taxation are widely different. This inconsistency provides issuers and investors with plenty of tax avoidance opportunities by transacting offshore or choosing the low-tax alternatives. Thus, the core problems of the tax system seriously impede the competitiveness of domestic capital markets.Besides, tax laws often lag distant behind the velocity of development in innovative financial products and transactions, reflected in the wide discrepancy in related concepts and definitions This lacking in clarity has caused long-standing sense of antagonism between tax authorities and taxpayers.Resolution of these issues, at least, building consensus on an agreeable initiative, is becoming more and more urgent. Hence, this thesis is devoted to discuss the way(s) taxes on structured financial products and innovative financial transactions should be levied for the purposes of reducing the distortion to well-established goals of taxation and promoting the efficiency of capital markets in Taiwan.
