網路拍賣公平交換協定
A Fair Exchange Protocol for Internet Auction
電子商務、網路拍賣、公平交換、電子現金
隨著網際網路的普及與電子商務的興起，網路拍賣儼然已成為時下最熱門的購物方式之一，但其中發生過為數不少的詐騙事件，這樣多少都會造成消費者對於線上購物有所顧忌，進而阻礙網路拍賣的發展。面對日益嚴重的網路詐騙問題，各大拍賣網站紛紛提出保障方案，然而現行的解決方案皆有其缺失，因此有必要對網路拍賣環境設計一個公平的交易方式。有鑑於今日網路拍賣的詐騙問題頻傳，且尚無正式標準解決此問題，本研究提出了一個適用於網路拍賣的公平交換協定，讓參與拍賣活動的買賣雙方，能以一個公平的方式進行交易。此協定是以Nenadic, et al.（2005）提出之可驗證與可復原的加密DSA簽章（Verifiable and Recoverable Encryption of DSA Signature）與Song和Korba（2004）提出的電子現金技術為基礎，所設計出的一個公平交換協定，此協定能滿足：(1)確保交易結果的公平性、(2)保障交易訊息的隱私性、(3)產生不可否認證據以證明交易雙方參與其中、(4)允許買方驗證商品，以確保所收到商品是交易前指定的、(5)降低拍賣網站對於交易過程的涉入程度。本研究期望透過密碼學的方法來保障買賣雙方的交易安全，進一步解決網路拍賣弊端，提升網路拍賣的安全性。
With the popularity of internet and the rise of electronic commerce, internet auctions have become one of the most popular shopping ways. But, there are so many cheating events in internet auctions, which will cause the consumers to doubt of the feasibility of online shopping and obstruct the development of internet auctions. Facing the increasing cheating problems of internet auctions, some major auction websites guarantee their customers against all lost and bring out some policies. However, these policies have some deficiencies, so it is necessary to design a fair transaction way for the environment of internet auctions.Because the cheating problems in the internet auction are getting worse, there is still no standard protocol to solve these problems. This study proposes a fair exchange protocol for internet auctions, which can let the buyer and seller deal with the transaction in a fair way. This protocol is based on the verifiable and recoverable encryption of DSA signature posed by Nenadic, et al. (2005) and the technique of electronic cash posed by Song and Korba (2004) to design a fair exchange protocol. This protocol can (1) assure the fairness of transaction result, (2) protect the privacy of transaction message, (3) produce non-repudiation evidence to prove the participation of buyer and seller, (4) allow the buyer to verify the goods that are correct, and (5) reduce auction websites’ involving extent during the transaction process. This study using the cryptography method to ensure the transaction security between buyers and sellers, and expects to solve the problem and promote the security of internet auctions.
