聯合採購與定價決策模式之研究-以傳統美容產品經銷商為例
A Study of a Joint Purchasing and Pricing Decisions Model -an Example from Traditional Distributors of Cosmetic

二階通路
認知價值
產品生命週期法

單打獨鬥的經營模式在現今競爭激烈的時代是非常不容易生存的；據估計，傳統經銷商每年平均流失20%左右的顧客，且可能有三分之一至半數的傳統店會被迫退出市場，這種現象是本次研究的動機。本研究模擬傳統美容經銷商的經營模式且將其e化，讓其店家可以線上聯合採購美容商品，以達到經濟批量的採購，讓雙方能增加價格上的彈性空間，有利於傳統二階通路的整體競爭力。本研究採用實驗設計法，根據實際資料分配而隨機產生數據，模擬決策制定的過程；在定價決策模式之研究中，從消費者的認知價值(perceived value)角度，使用變異數分析方式來得到價位相關資訊，以提供給決策者做定價確認及調整的決策依據；在採購方面，本研究以產品特性和產品銷售狀況的角度，運用庫存管理ABC分析加上產品生命週期法，來產生各種產品庫存管理的不同等級指標，提供給決策者產品採購的決策依據；另外，績效評估方面以資料包絡法來評估各店家的經營績效並給予不同的改善建議；其中，並配合分析層級程序法的運用，產生各店家的環境人員評估排序結果；最後，由於考量兼具量化和質性的整體評估目的，本研究使得決策者能有更多的決策資訊，期望決策者能更周詳、嚴密地制定採購與定價的決策。
Business model of individual operations is not easy to survive in this extremely competitive era nowadays. It is estimated that the traditional distributor loses about 20% of customers on average every year and there is approximately 1/3 to 1/2 of the traditional stores being forced to withdraw from the market. These phenomena are the main motivation of this study. The business model of traditional distributor of cosmetic is simulated in this study and then implemented on a web-based platform such that traditional stores can jointly purchase cosmetic products on-line and then reach economic order lot size, namely the advantage of joint purchasing. It enables both sides to increase the elasticity of price, and enhances the whole competitiveness of traditional two-level channel.Several experimental designs are implemented, random data are generated based on the distribution of historical data, and the decision-making process is then simulated in this study. Consumers' perceived value is used in analysis of variance (ANOVA) to obtain relevant information of price. In purchasing process, ABC analysis and product life cycle are applied to products’ characteristics and sales conditions to generate index of different classes of various product stock management which decision makers can use in product purchasing. For performance evaluation, data envelopment analysis (DEA) and analytic hierarchy process (AHP) are integrated to evaluate the operations performance of each store and a great of improvement can be obtained. Finally, quantitative and qualitative factors are considered in the overall evaluation model such that decision makers can obtain more important information and make more comprehensive and rigorous decisions of pricing and purchasing.
