股價趨勢技術分析應用於修正式投資組合保險策略CPPI與TIPP之績效比較
Comparison of Investment Performance by Applying Technical Analysis of Stock Trends to Trading Strategy of Revised Portfolio Insurance
投資組合保險、CPPI、可行性、中長期、平均線、標準型、投資人、TIPP、動態調整風險參數
台股在歷經多次劇幅變動，投資人偏向保守，國內基金公司導入固定比例投資組合保險策略（Constant Portion Portfolio Insurance）CPPI或固定時間不變的投資組合保險（ Time-Invariant Portfolio Protection）TIPP的商品以滿足投資人的需求，本研究希望可因此暸解投資組合保險實際上運作過程其操作特性外，並加以改良，藉由尋求動態調整風險參數M值，提升投資組合保險的投資績效效率。　　本文用數個多空期間檢測標準型 (風險乘數M值固定)的投資組合保險運用在台灣股市的可行性；並分析各種投資組合保險策略的優劣勢及保險後的績效分析。同時加入技術分析工具(中長期移動平均線)，來判定股市多空，改變風險乘數M值，並比較動態投資組合保險與固定 值的傳統式投資組合保險的期間報酬及風險值。　　本研究成果顯示，加入多空判斷的投資組合保險策略，確實能夠創造比傳統型投資組合保險策略更佳的期末資產報酬及更高的夏普指標績效表現。同時，　隨著投資期間加長，涵蓋了較為明顯的多空走勢，修正式的投資組合保險策略在經過較長的投資期間淬煉，可產生的超額報酬也越趨可觀。而 值的求得來自二個參數λ 及 γ，本研究得出λ=0.4可以求出最適化的M 值，但γ 對M的影響並不顯著。
In recent years, Taiwan stock market went up and down sharply.  And investors appear to have turned more conservative than previously.  In order to meet investors requested, the investment trust corporations tried to sell more conservative products such as (1) the fund of Constant Portion Portfolio Insurance Srategy, named CPPI, (2) the fund of Time-Invariant Portfolio Protection, named TIPP.  Then the thesis is not only comparing the difference between Portfolio Insurance strategies (CPPI and TIPP) but also trying to find out the best solution to enhance the performance of portfolio.  Therefore, the solutions of the Portfolio Insurance Strategy extracted the dynamic multiplier M to instead of static multiplier  .   The study used the backtesting way to research the performance of the portfolio that use risk-avoiding tools including several bull markets and bear markets.  Moreover, the research also applied technical analysis of stock trend while got the dynamic M .  The portfolio insurance of dynamic M , the analysis called Revised Portfolio Insurance.   The empirical results shows (1) Revised Portfolio Insurance generated higher investment return and higher sharp index.  (2) For long-term investing, Revised Portfolio Insurance would get higher excess return than Portfolio Insurance.  (3) we found out the most optimized dynamic M  of Revised Portfolio Insurance if λ=0.4 .  And λ is a parameter of M .
