腳踏車運動對高中甲組籃球運動員心率變異度之效應
The Effect of Stationary Cycling on Heart Rate Variability in High School Elite Basketball Players
高中甲組籃球運動員、高中學生、心率變異度、心電圖、心跳間期、副交感神經
摘  要  本研究探討16位高中甲組籃球運動員與15高中一般生，在腳踏車運動後心率變異度之差異。首先收集安靜時坐姿10 分鐘之心電圖資料，然後在腳踏車上踩10分鐘、強度160W同時收集10分鐘之心電圖資料，運動後再收集坐姿休息10分鐘之心電圖資料。將所有的心電圖資料做各種統計學上的計算，以求得各種變異度的指標，本研究以512跳心電圖資料作為時域分析。時域指標包括心跳間期的平均值(Mean)、心跳間期的標準偏差(SD)、心跳間期的變異係數(CV)、心跳間期差值超過50毫秒的比例(PNN50)和心跳間期差值平方和的均方根(RMSSD)。心電圖資料經過快速傅利葉轉換(fast fourier transform，FFT) 為功率頻譜，頻域指標包括總功率(TP)、高頻功率(HFP)、低頻功率(LFP)、極低頻功率(VLFP)、高頻功率比(nHFP)、低頻功率比(nLFP)、低高頻功率比(LFP/HFP)，籃球員與一般高中生在不同身體狀態下心率變異度之比較，籃球員與一般高中生安靜時、運動中、恢復期心率變異度之比較。  研究結果顯示，所有心率變異度指標在高中甲組籃球員與一般高中生在安靜時並無顯著差異。此外，高中甲組籃球員在運動時有較高的心跳間期的平均值、高頻功率、低頻功率、高頻功率比和低頻功率比。而在運動過後，他們的心跳間期的平均值、心跳間期的標準偏差、心跳間期的變異係數、心跳間期差值平方和的均方根、心跳間期差值超過50毫秒的比例、總功率、高頻功率、低頻功率、極低頻功率、高頻功率比和低高頻功率比等指標也高於一般高中生。在所有的心率變異度指標中，除了兩組高中生的低高頻功率比在運動中減少比起運動後增加來得顯著外，在高中甲組籃球員這一組中，在安靜時與運動後大部份的心率變異度指標則無顯著差異；然而一般高中生在運動時及運動後大部份的心率變異度指標則有顯著差異。在同樣的運動負荷下，高中甲組籃球員比一般高中生在運動中的心率變異度所變化的程度較低，且運動後的心率變異度則恢復得較快。  這些結果顯示出，在休息的狀態下，副交感神經在高中甲組籃球員及一般高中生當中並不會有任何的不同。而高中甲組籃球員在心率變異度有較小的減低、恢復得較快，顯示出高中甲組籃球員在副交感神經系統及心率變異度也有較高效率的調節作用。關鍵詞高中甲組籃球運動員、高中學生、心率變異度、心電圖、心跳間期、副交感神經
AbstractWe studied the heart rate variability (HRV) at cycling exercise in 16 high school elite basketball players and 15 age matched controls. A conventional lead II electrocardiogram was recorded for 10 minutes at baseline condition. Then these subjects had a cycling ergometers exercise and electrocardiogram at 160 watts for 10 minutes. After exercise, these subjects take a rest at sitting position and have the third session of electrocardiogram recording. The R-R interval was then calculated from the recorded electrocardiogram after R wave identification. The last stationary 512 RR intervals in each session were then used for HRV analysis. Time domain measures including mean of R-R intervals (RRI), standard deviation of R-R intervals (SD), Coefficient of variation (CV), the percent of R-R intervals differing > 50 ms from the preceding R-R (PNN50%) and standard deviation of the root mean square of the  RRI (RMSSD) were calculated by statistics and the frequency domain measures including total power (TP), high frequency power (HFP), low frequency power (LFP), very low- frequency power (VLF), normalized high frequency power (nHFP), normalized low frequency power, (nLFP), and low-to-high frequency power ratio (LFP/HFP) were calculated by Fast Fourier transformation. A signed rank test was used to compare the HRV measures between elite and control groups. A repeated measures analysis of variance on rank was used to compare the HRV measures before, during and after exercise in both groups.We found that all HRV measures did not differ significantly between elite and control groups at baseline condition. The elite group had higher mean RRI, HFP, LFP, nHFP and nLFP during exercise; and higher mean RRI, SD, CV, RMSSD, PNN50%, TP, HFP, LFP, VLFP, nHFP and LFP/HFP after exercise than those of the controls. All HRV measures except LFP/HFP decreased dramatically during exercise and then increased after exercise in both groups. The comparison between baseline and after exercise of the most HRV measures was not significantly in the elite group; whereas the comparison between during exercise and after exercise of the most HRV measures significantly in the control group. The elite group had a much lessened decrease in HRV at the same cycling load during exercise and had a more rapid recovery to baseline condition after exercise then those of the control group.These results implied that the autonomic nervous control might not be different between elite and control group in the resting condition. The lessened decrease and rapid recovery in the HRV in response to the fixed load of exercise in the elite group implied that the elite group had a more efficient regulatory function in the modulation of the autonomic nervous system and HRV.Key word elite basketball players, high school students, heart rate variability, electrocardiogram, RR intervals, autonomic nervous activity.
