臺北市國民中學教師角色認同與組織公民行為關係之研究
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE IDENTIFICATION OF TEACHERS' ROLE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP BEHAVIOR AT PUBLIC JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI CITY
教師角色認同、組織公民行為、社會認同、自我歸類理論

本研究主要目的是探討國民中學教師對其教師角色認同程度與其組織公民行為間的關係。以問卷調查為主要的研究方法，研究對象以分層取樣，從臺北市立58所國民中學，抽取32所學校，共寄出1105份問卷，有效回收770份，有效回收率是69.7﹪。研究問卷為研究者自編之「教師角色認同與組織公民行為量表」，採用的統計方法有描述性統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析、皮爾森積差相關、簡單線性廻歸與逐步多元廻歸。本研究之主要結論為：（1）國民中學教師對其教師角色認同與組織公民行為表現均不高；（2）教師年齡、服務年資、擔任職務在教師角色認同與組織公民行為表現上有顯著差異，（3）教師角色認同與組織公民行為有顯著正相關，（4）三個不同層次歸類的教師角色認同中的兩個對不同向度的組織公民行為有顯著預測力，即「自我歸類」的教師角色認同可有效預測「朝向自我實現」的組織公民行為，「學校整體組織歸類」的教師角色認同可有效預測「朝向工作團隊」及「朝向學校整體組織」的組織公民行為。依據研究結果，對教育行政主管機關、學校單位及國民中學教師及後續研究提出具體之建議。
The purpose of the study was aimed to understand the current conditions of teachers’ role identification and organizational citizenship behavior at public junior high schools in Taipei city, to explore correlation between teachers’ role identification and organizational citizenship behavior. By using the questionnaires titled “The Survey Questionnaires for Teachers’ Role Identification and Organizational Citizenship Behavior in Junior High School Teachers”, the researcher used this tool to make the relevant investigation.  The subjects of the study were teachers from 32 public junior high schools in Taipei City. There were totally 1150 questionnaires sent with 770 valid responses received. The valid return rate was 69.7%. The questionnaire data were analyzed by descriptive statistics, independent sample t-test, one-way analysis (ANOVA), Pearson’s product-moment correlation, simple liner regression, and multiple stepwise regression.The findings of the study were described as followsI.  The degree of teachers’ role identification and the performance of organizational citizenship behavior were under average.II.  There was significant differences for teachers’ age, instruction experience, appointment of teachers in both teachers’ role identification and organizational citizenship behavior.III.  Teachers’ role identification and organizational citizenship behavior was significantly positive correlated.IV.  Two of the three different-level categorizations in teachers’ role identification had significant positive prediction in different forms of OCB in school self-categorization in teachers’ role identification positively predicted OCB toward self-fulfillment, entire school’s organizational categorization in teachers’ role identification positively predicted OCB towards both the team and the organization of the entire school.At the end, the researcher proposes some concrete suggestions to administration authorities, schools, teachers, and follow up study according to conclusions of the present study.
