臺北縣公立國民小學創新環境與教師教學創新行為之研究
A STUDY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE INNOVATIVE ENVIRONMENT AND THE INSTRUCTIONAL INNOVATION OF TEACHERS IN PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AT TAIPEI COUNTY
創新環境、教學創新、國民小學
本研究旨在探討臺北縣公立國民小學創新環境與教師教學創新行為之關係，並瞭解不同背景變項之學校和教師在創新環境與教師教學創新行為上的差異情形，同時分析創新環境對教師教學創新行為的預測作用。針對臺北縣公立國民小學教師依分層隨機抽樣進行問卷調查，共發出825份，問卷回收630份，回收率為76.4%，有效問卷回收率為73.9%。所得資料以平均數和標準差、t檢定、單因子變異數分析、積差相關以及複迴歸分析等統計方法進行處理與分析。    研究結果發現臺北縣公立國民小學創新環境以組織文化與溝通的情況較為理想，資源提供部分則有待改善；在教師教學創新行為方面，以班級氣氛經營的情況較佳，評量方式部分則可以稍加努力。其次，有關背景變項在創新環境上的差異情形，整體而言，以校齡為41年以上、規模在24班以下的學校情況較佳，且兼任行政職的教師其感受程度顯著高於科任教師；另外綜觀教師教學創新行為部分，則教師以41歲以上、服務年資超過16年，學校以校齡41年以上、24班以下規模之表現情形較佳。最後，創新環境與教師教學創新行為之間具顯著正相關；創新環境對教師教學創新行為具預測力，且整體來看，以資源提供的預測力最高，年齡變項次之。    根據上述結論，本研究建議教育行政主管機關應積極宣揚創新理念，發揮資源整合功能，同時，亦應適當調整學校規模，以激勵並協助學校創新環境之建構；學校方面則應主動提供各項行政資源，發展能適合組織環境及成員特性的獎勵制度，並強化新進或年輕教師之教學輔導工作，鼓勵教師充實多元評量專業知能，以提升教學創新表現。
The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between the innovative environment and the instructional innovation of teachers in public elementary schools at Taipei County. The differences between the demographic variables and the innovative environment as well as the instructional innovation of teachers were analyzed. The present study also tried to explore whether the instructional innovation of teachers could be predicted by the innovative environment practices.The present study adopted the method of questionnaire survey. The population of the study was teachers from the public elementary schools at Taipei County, involving 825 participants which were randomly selected by the stratified sampling method. The total useable questionnaires returned were 630 with a rate of 76.4%, and the analyzable data reached 73.9%. Data were analyzed by using the method of descriptive and inferential statistics, including means and standard deviations, t-tests, product-moment correlations, one-way ANOVA, and step-wise multiple regressions.There were several findings in the present study. First of all, the organizational culture and communication performed the best among other aspects of the innovative environment. The provision of resources still needed to be enhanced. On the aspect of instructional innovation, the atmosphere of class received the highest scores, yet the assessment styles demanded a further improvement. Second, the discrepancy of background variables upon innovative environment turned out to be in favor of school age over 41 years old and of school size less than 24 classes. Besides, teachers with administrative duties perceived the innovative environment better than teachers with duties mainly on teaching. On the aspect of the instructional innovation of teachers, participants aged above 41 and the year of service exceeding 16 years had superior performance. The similar results were also found in the school aged over 41 years and class sized less than 24 classes. Finally, the relationship between the innovative environment and the instructional innovation of teachers was found significantly positive correlated. As a whole, the provision of resources in the innovative environment was the best predictor to predict the instructional innovation of teachers, the ages of the teachers was the second predictor.According to the above conclusions, the study suggests that the Bureau of Education should advocate the concept of innovation and integrate the variety of resources. Meanwhile, the size of the school should be taken into consideration in order to construct a well-designed innovative environment. In order to facilitate the instructional innovation of the teachers, the school administrators should actively provide diverse administrative resources, develop a well-designed motivational mechanism, as well as enhance the teacher mentoring program and assessment abilities of the teachers.
