臺北市公眾無線區域網路(PWLAN)發展策略之研究
The Study of Developmental Strategy of Public Wireless Local Area Network on Taipei City
公眾無線區域網路、無線區域網路、無線城市、熱點

無線網路都市的建置，有助於提升城市競爭力，全球主要城市也紛紛進行建置計畫，但其建置具有營運風險存在，切合民眾需求的營運策略，方能促進公眾無線區域網路服務市場的成長。臺北市公眾無線區域網路服務2005年底正式營運，目前民眾使用率徧低，營運成效未獲顯著成長。本研究希以民眾需求為導向，瞭解民眾對於公眾無線區域網路之使用意向，提出各種營運方案，瞭解其對民眾使用意願的影響程度，並瞭解民眾對臺北市公眾無線區域網路服務目標及效益之認同程度，以探討臺北市公眾無線區域網路未來發展的策略。本研究採取問卷調查法，共發出問卷400份，回收331份，扣除無效樣本後，有效樣本共300份。研究結果發現：1.民眾對於公眾無線上網連線品質及上網地點的廣泛性較為重視，最常使用的服務項目為閱覽搜尋資訊類，最常使用的時段為晚上，使用地點以室內空間為主，認為合理的計費方式以月計費為最多，而對於每月付費價格可接受300元以下的付費水準。2.經由因素分析萃取出營運方案四個因素構面為：使用便利性、申辦容易性、內容服務多樣性及宣導獎助性，而民眾最重視使用便利性。3.對於臺北市公眾無線區域網路服務，民眾認為網路頻寬及速率之需求尚未獲得滿足，但對其所創造的無限商機及應用環境，則多予以認同。4.對於未來發展策略，臺北市政府的推動政策僅為輔助性質，而無線網路服務供應商短期內應儘速佈建熱點、提升連線品質及降低收費水準，中期規劃各家帳號可通用、廣設申辦通路、簡化申辦手續及付費方式，長期則應加強內容服務的多樣性。
Establishing wireless network city is helpful to promote the city competition. The major city of the world also has implementation plan. But it still has some risk. The operation strategy must fulfill the citizen satisfaction that’s able to increase the market share of the public wireless local area network (PWLAN) service. The PWLAN service of Taipei began at the end of 2005. Now, the utilization rate is low and no significant increasing for operation result.This research hopes to be citizen demand oriented. It wants to understand the intension that the citizen uses the PWLAN service. This research applies kinds of the operation plan for exploring the influence of citizen using intension and realizing the goal and agreement degree for citizen to use Taipei city PWLAN service. It will be the future strategy to implement Taipei’s PWLAN. The research use questionnaire survey method, 400 copies of questionnaire were issued, while 331 copies were returned and 300 copies were effective.The result shows that1.The citizen emphasizes on network quality and how many places can connect with Internet. The major service is information searching. The most periods are at night and usually use it in the building. Monthly fee and under NTD 300 are acceptable.2.Four dimensions for operation plan are extracted based on factor analysis .They are convenience, easy to apply, multiplicity content and advertisement guidance. The most important one is convenience for the citizen.3.For the Taipei’s PWLAN service, the citizen is dissatisfied with the network bandwidth and speed. But most of the citizens agree that the PWLAN service created unlimited business opportunity and application environment.4.For future strategy of Taipei’s PWLAN, government’s policy is only auxiliary. The short-term plan is that PWLAN provider should be implementing hotspots, upgrading network quality, reducing monthly fee as soon as possible. The medium-term plan is that the different provider’s account can be shared, easy to apply and payment. The long-term plan is that there is multiplicity service.
