臺北縣國民中小學員生消費合作社經營功能、困境與型態之調查研究
THE SURVEY OF MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS, DIFFICULTIES AND TYPES IN SCHOOL COOPERATIVE STORES OF ELEMENTARY AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS IN TAIPEI COUNTY
員生消費合作社、簽約委外
學校是社會的一部份，除了學習活動之外，有許多生活需求必需得到滿足。國民中小學設立員生消費合作社，不僅提供了師生日常生活所需，更有經濟、社會、教育等功能。但不可諱言的，員生社的經營有許多問題。在精省之後，臺北縣政府回歸合作社法精神，讓臺北縣國民中小學可以在「繼續自營」、「簽約委外」、「廢除停止」等三種經營型態中，自由決定員生社採取何種型態。此政策在實施六年後，其現況為何？有決定權力的教職員工對影響此一問題的認知為何？是研究者所欲採討的問題。    本研究採訪談法及問卷調查法，為補充文獻探討不足及了解實務人員對本研究問題的看法及意見，事先以立意取樣9人做為訪談對象。問卷調查則以自編「國民中小學員生消費合作社經營型態調查問卷」，經過專家效度、預試信效度考驗後，以臺北縣公立國民中小學94學年度設有員生消費合作社的教職員工為研究母群體。在95%的信心水準下，控制抽樣誤差在±3.5%以內，採分層隨機抽樣法進行抽樣，樣本學校計44所，共發出問卷784份，回收問卷共計608份，回收率達77.6%，扣除無效廢卷9份，其中有效問卷共計599份，可用率為76.4%。　　最後根據統計資料結果，加以分析討論，做成以下結論與建議：結論：一、教職員工對員生社「功能」及「困境」且有認同情形。二、教職員工因不同背景因素而對員生社「功能」及「困境」認知呈現各有差異。三、不同背景變項的教職員工對「員生社經營型態的選擇」情形各有差異。四、不同員生社認同情形在「經營型態選擇」上各有差異。五、教職員工對員生社的經營型態且有不同的選擇。建議：一、對相關單位的建議（一）對所有教育行政機關的建議      尊重任何一種選擇，學校自主精神應予落實。（二）對臺北縣社會局的建議      1. 加強理念推廣，協助經營問題解決      2. 考量學校環境差異，訂定不同策略（三）對臺北縣教育局的建議      1. 對員生社經營簽約委外進行輔導與管理      2. 注意合作社法規範，簽約委外應正名及開立發票      3. 權利金的使用要符合公義性      4. 協助小型或偏遠學校辦理聯合委外作業二、對學校方面的建議    1. 理性決策，確實執行    2. 參考不同經驗，截長補短
School is part of the society. Besides learning activities, many needs concerning living must be met. Elementary schools set up stores for both the faculty and students to consume there. The stores not only provide the faculty and students with the necessity for daily life but also serve as the functions of economy, society and education. However, needless to say, there exist many problems concerning the stores set up in elementary schools. After the re-organization of Taiwan province, Taipei County Government flashbacked to the nature of the law of cooperative stores, allowing elementary schools and junior high schools choose one of the following three managing styles, continuing the business, contracting out, and abolishing and stop running, to whether continue or stop running their business. What was the current condition through the six-year implementation? What was the recognition of the faculty who have the right to make a decision on affecting the issue? These two issues were to be explored by the author.    This study was based on the methodology of interviewing and surveying with a view to supplementing the lack of literature and realizing the views and opinions of people who were involved in on the issues submitted here. Nine people were chosen in advance based on purpose sampling to be the subjects of the interviewing. Surveying questionnaires were edited by myself and entitled “Questionnaires on the running styles of the cooperative stores in elementary schools and junior high schools.” Through the testing of validity and pretesting validity and reliability by experts, the population of the study was the faculty and students whose schools were located in Taipei County and set up cooperative stores in 2005. By the 95% of reliability, within the 3.5% of controlled sampling errors, and by the method of stratified random sampling, the sampling was done. The number of the sampling schools was forty four with total questionnaires of 784. The responding questionnaires were 608 copies. The responding rate was 77.6%. Minus 9 copies of invalid questionnaires, there were 599 copies of questionnaires which were valid. The usable rate of the questionnaires was 76.4%.    Through the analysis and discussion on the final results deriving from the statistic materials, the following conclusions and recommendations were made.Conclusions1. The faculty and students tend to identify with the function and   difficulties which the cooperative stores take and meet,   respectively.2. There was difference among the faculty from different backgrounds   in the recognition of the function and difficulties the   cooperative stores take and meet, respectively.3. There was difference among the faculty from the variable item,   different backgrounds, in the choice of the running styles of the   cooperative stores.4. There was difference among the different cooperative stores in the   identification with the choice of running styles.5. There was different choice of the faculty having toward the   running styles of the cooperative stores.Recommendations1. Recommendations given to the related departments   (1) To the departments of educational administrations       To respect choice of any kind and to make sure of the       implementation of school autonomy.   (2) To the bureau of social affairs, Taipei County       A. To reinforce the development of the idea and to help solve          the problem in operation.       B. To take the different settings of schools into          consideration and to adopt different strategies.   (3) To the bureau of education, Taipei County.       A. To guide and manage the cooperative stores contracted out.       B. To pay attention to the rules of cooperative stores, to          legalize the stores contracted out and to issue invoices.       C. To be fair and just on the use of license bills.       D. To help those schools which were either small or remote to          get together as a whole to set up contracted-out          cooperative stores.2. Recommendations given to schools.   (1) To reasonably make decisions and to actually implement them.   (2) To refer to different experiences and to make up the       disadvantages by imposing on those advantages.
