臺灣地區居民國內旅遊行為之研究─以臺北縣市居民為例
Research on Domestic Tourism of Taipei area residents
國內旅遊、臺北縣市、市場區隔

本研究依據交通部觀光局90年至93年「國人旅遊狀況調查」原始資料，進一步探究臺北縣市居民的國內旅遊動向、旅遊型態、旅遊據點的選擇及旅遊消費之差異與特性，並尋找最合適的變數，建立市場區隔並找出最具潛力的目標市場。在資料的分析上，以敘述性統計分析、交叉分析、分組模型分析及多變量分析等方法做為分析工具。研究結果顯示：ㄧ、臺北縣市居民全年國內旅遊率皆維持在九成以上的水準。並且無論是人口數，亦或是國內旅遊的總人次、旅遊消費支出，這兩個城市的居民皆占全國整體的四分之ㄧ強，因此臺北縣市居民是值得深入研究的旅遊目標市場。二、20~49歲的臺北縣市居民是重要的國內市場客源，並且家庭旅遊是主要的客源組成。就人口特性來看，年齡愈輕者、教育程度愈高者、職業為軍公教人員、主管及經理人員、農林漁牧工作人員或學生、個人每月平均收入四萬元及以上者是旅遊偏好者。就季別來看，第1季旅遊率最高，第2、3季居次，以第4季最低。三、週末星期日、當日來回短天期的旅遊型態居多，並且旅遊地點以前往本縣市及鄰近縣市居多。「自然賞景」是最受喜愛的遊憩活動，選擇旅遊地點主要的考慮因素也是以「景觀優美」為優先。四、旅遊動向及旅遊型態可以用年齡、教育程度、職業、婚姻狀況、個人所得及季節等變數來做為區隔。而旅遊消費支出的高低主要則是受到旅遊天數、旅遊距離及使用的交通工具的影響。在旅遊據點類型的選擇上，可以用旅遊天數、住宿方式、交通工具、旅遊目的、教育程度及年齡進行區隔，並且因據點類型的不同旅遊費用也有顯著的差異。
This study used the 1999 to 2004 “Survey of Travel by ROC Citizens” data provided by the Tourism Bureau Ministry of Transportation and Communication, ROC. The objectives of this study are to understand of the Taipei city and Taipei county residents' domestic traveling activities, traveling types, visiting location selecting and expenditure of travel. This study also looked for the most suitable parameters, seting up market segmentation and find most potential target market. The statistical methods includes Descriptive statistics, cross table, CHAID( Chi-square Automatic Interaction Detection) , Logistic Regression and others Multivariate Statistical Analysis.The result of study is as follows 1. During the year from 1999 to 2004, above 90% of the Taipei city and Taipei county residents' traveled at least once domestically. No matter the population, total number of domestic tourist trips, or total domestic tourist traveling expenditure taken by these two cities' residents above quarter of Taiwan. So Taipei city and Taipei county residents are traveling goal market and worth thoroughly studying. 2. The Taipei area residents' age from 20 to 49 was important clients of the market, and the family travel was the main client source. Analyze the characteristics of professional, people who are the younger, the higher education degree, government employees and teachers, managers and supervisors, farming,woodman and fisher, or student, and income highter than NT$40,000 were like to travel. Of the four quarters in the year, the first quarter travel rate was higher than others, follow by second quarter and third quarter, the lowest was the fourth quarter. 3. Domestic tourist trips on weekend and same-day returns were the majority traveling types. The major visiting locations were within the same region. “Natural scenery sightseeing”was the most popular activity and “beautiful nature scenery” was the most important factor consider by the tourists when they chose visiting places. 4. We can distinguish traveling activities and traveling types from people's age, education, occupation, marriage, income, and the season. The expenditure of travel was influenced by number of trip day, trip distance and transportation. On the travel location selecting, we could separate from the number of trip day, lodging type, transportation, trip purpose, education and age. And the tourist traveling expenditure was also significant difference from the travel location type.
