艾瑞克．韋塔克《三首花之歌》之分析與詮釋
Analysis and Interpretation of Eric Whitacre's 《Three Flower Songs》
韋塔克、無伴奏合唱曲、混聲合唱、作曲家

韋塔克，這位1970年出生的美國作曲家，年輕時的某些行徑和時下叛逆的青少年沒有兩樣。進入大學後，在偶然的機緣下接觸到了合唱音樂，大二的時候寫下了他第一首合唱作品＜去吧！甜美的玫瑰＞，該曲發表後令眾人為之驚豔。如今他已成為了一名成功的年輕作曲家、指揮家，他的作品在目前許多音樂會的曲目中有如耀眼的明星，而且他所出版的樂譜在全球各地已銷售超過四十萬本，並為他獲得許多作曲比賽的肯定。　　韋塔克的作品，不論在曲式上或是和聲上，可說是沒有任何理論或公式可循。但是在他所使用的歌詞上，尤其是在詩的意境上，卻能看出他對音樂的想法，所以在研究韋塔克作品時，詩的意義、語韻以及背景便成為了最重要的參考依據。　　本文將就處理音樂的立場提出若干剖析及探討，除前言及結語外，共分為四個段落探討：第一章是介紹韋塔克的生平和他經常使用的作曲手法，以及本文主題《三首花之歌》的創作背景；第二章至第四章則分別就三首歌曲的歌詞、音樂做分析，並提出在詮釋上的重點及處理方式。另有三項附錄於後，包括韋塔克專訪實錄、韋塔克合唱作品覽表，以及韋塔克其他作品覽表。
Eric Whitacre (1970- ), American composer, who touched the choral music after entering the university under accidental chance, wrote the first choral work <Go! Lovely Rose> when he’s 21. This amazing work made him a great success after being published. To date, he has already become young and successful composer, conductor, and his works like the dazzling star in the repertoire of concerts. His published works have already sold over 400,000,and received many competition awards.The style of Whitacre's works, no matter on the musical form or on the harmony, it does’t depand on any theory or formulae. But can find out his idea to the music in the lyrics that he uses, especially on the artistic conception of the poem. While studying Whitacre's works, the meaning , language musical sound and background of the poem become the most important reference basis.This text deal with position of music propose several analysis and probe into, except that preface and conclude the speech just, divided into four paragraphs and probed into altogether Chapter one the life of introducing Whitacre and tactics of composing music which he often use, and the backgrounds of <<Three Flower’s Songs>>; Chapter two to four make analysis on the lyrics, music of three songs, and propose it in annotating the focal point on and treatment way. Have besides three item appendix on behind, including Whitacre’s interview, and the lists of Whitacre's choral works and other works.
