處置效果與報酬動能關係之探討
The Causality Relationship Between Momentum and Disposition

行為財務
動能效果
處置效果

本研究探討動能效果與處置效果的因果關係。動能效果預期過去高（低）報酬之類股，後續報酬持續上漲（下跌），如果投資人能夠理性預期股市的動能效果，則其後續抱盈持虧的處置效果就會降低；反之，如果投資人出現售盈持虧的投資行為，會減緩資訊傳遞當股價的速度，造成較強的動能效果 (Barberis, Shleifer與Vishny, 1998)。據此推論，動能效果對處置效果的影響為負向，而處置效果對動能效果的影響為正向。本研究以台灣地區股市與投資人為樣本，以落差期報酬與處置效果（參閱Barber與 Odean (1998)，以出售獲利比率減出售損失比率衡量）迴歸的結果顯示，動能效果對處置效果之負向影響得到驗證，且越為近期之報酬對處置效果之影響越為顯著。以處置效果對後續報酬的迴歸結果顯示，處置效果對後續半年期與一年期的報酬有顯著正向影響。另外本研究加入週轉率是否影響二者的關係，研究的結果顯示，與並無太大的差異。最後，以Granger Causality 重新探討二者的因果關係的結果大致符合先前預期，唯處置對動能的正向影響較為顯著，而動能對處置的影響較不顯著。本研究進一步根據股票屬性與投資人屬性分群探討動能與處置效果的因果關係，結果發現，系統風險愈小、可線上交易與有信用帳戶的投資人，動能效果對處置效果的影響較為顯著；系統風險較大、B M值高、規模大、非電子股，與年齡較小、開戶時間較短、不能線上交易的投資人，處置效果對動能效果的影響較為顯著。
This research is to investigate the causal relationship between momentum effect and the disposition effect. Our prediction is that if investors could perceive that stocks with higher (lower) prior returns will trend in the future they would refrain from the inclination of selling winners while holding on losers which is dubbed as the disposition effect. In contrast, the information transmission will be retarded and therefore forming price momentum when investors exhibit the disposition effect. In this research we use a trading record of Taiwanese individual investors provided by a renowned brokerage house to investigate the issue. The regression results show that momentum effect has a negative impact on the disposition effect implying that investors perceiving that stock prices will trend will reduce their reluctance to selling losers. The closers the stock returns the more negative impounding impact of momentum effect on the disposition effect. In contrast, the regression of returns on the disposition effect shows that the disposition effect with the lagging period of six months to one year has positive impact on returns. Turnover shows no intermediately effect on the relation between the disposition effect and the momentum effect. Finally, the robustness check of using the Granger causality yields a similar while weaker result. The impact of momentum on the disposition effect remains while not vice versa.An upclose of the relation via stock attributes and individual characteristics shows that the momentum-disposition relation is more significant in low systematic-risk stocks, online traders, and margin traders. In contrast, the disposition-momentum relation is more significant in high-systematic, high B M, large-cap, non-electronic stocks and investors who have shorter duration associated with the brokerage house and traditional investors.
