蟻群系統於多目標流程式排程有效解之研究
On efficient solutions of multi-objective flow shop scheduling problems
作業排程、多目標、有效解、蟻群最佳化、流程式工廠
多目標作業排程問題在近年來受到許多的重視與討論，有關多目標的主要解法之一的「有效解方法」(或稱柏拉圖解法)一直為許多學者採用，此法之重要性在於它提供了所考慮的多項準則之任意線性組合目標值之最佳解所在的完整解集合。有效解的觀念常被使用在排程問題上，因為有效排程數通常不會很多，因此，決策者可以很容易的從這些有效排程的組合中，挑選到符合其現實需要的最適排程。探討作業排程之相關文獻，可知多目標排程問題本質上多為NP-hard，求取最佳解往往須花費很多時間。且現有之研究報告多局限在特定雙目標的問題。所以發展一個適用大部分求解目標的一般性方法，去處理大規模的多目標有效排程問題實有其必要性。近年來，許多學者應用共通式啟發演算法的方法，來求解這類NP-hard問題，例如車輛途程、生產排程、排班表等問題，都已證明有不錯的效果。常見的共通式啟發法有塔布搜尋法、模擬退火法、基因演算法和蟻群最佳化演算法等，其中蟻群最佳化演算法是近來被高度重視的求解方法，因此本研究應用蟻群最佳化演算法求解多目標有效排程問題。本研究考慮之目標為最大完工時間、平均流程時間、平均延遲時間、最大延遲時間與延遲完工件數等五項，作兩兩目標組合，所以總共有10種求解問題組合。本研究利用蟻群最佳化演算法之原理，設計二個多目標蟻群系統(multi-objective ant colony system, MOACS)演算法，以求解此10種雙目標組合的大型流程式排程問題的近似有效解集合。同時為了評估本研究演算法的有效性，本文同時撰寫Loukil et al. (2005)所提出的多目標模擬退火法(multi-objective simulated annealing, MOSA)的程式，以同樣的測試資料帶入，比較MOACS與MOSA在求解此類排程問題上的有效性。研究結果發現，本論文所提出的兩種MOACS演算法，均比MOSA能在大部分的問題組合中得到更完整的近似有效解，證實MOACS演算法在求解多目標排程問題上有其適用性。
The topic of multiple objectives has received much attention in operations scheduling in recent years. The efficient solution method (or Pareto approach), one of primary approaches for multiple criteria, has been used in scheduling for a long time. The importance of the efficient solution method is that it provides the complete set of possibly optimal solutions for any objective function involving the chosen criteria. It is particularly useful in scheduling because the number of the efficient schedules is usually relatively small, and thereby the decision maker can easily pick an appropriate schedule from among the set.Reviewing the scheduling related literatures, we can know that almost all the multi-objective scheduling problems are essentially NP-hard. It usually cost us much time to solve these problems. The current researches are often restricted to specific two-objective problems. So there is a need for a general method able to treat a large class of models and independent of the considered objectives.In recent years, there are many scholars using some meta-heuristics approach to effectively solve NP-hard problems such as vehicle routing, production scheduling, time tabling, etc. Examples of meta-heuristics include simulated annealing (SA), tabu search (TS), and ant colony optimization (ACO).Especially, ACO is a important meta-heuristics which has received more and more attention in recent years. In this study, we try to apply ACO to solve multi-objective production efficient scheduling problems.We consider five criteria, which are mean flow time ( ), make-span( ), total tardiness( ), maximum tardiness( ), and the number of tardy jobs( ). Two criteria may form a bi-criteria scheduling problem. So we must solve 10 sets of problems. We used the nature of ACO to design two multi-objective ant colony system (MOACS) to generate the set of approximated efficient solutions of this 10 large scale bi-criteria scheduling problems. We will take the method in the flow shop experiments, and use the simulated data to test the effectiveness and efficiency of the method. For evaluating the effectiveness of our meta-heuristic approach, we also ran the multi-objective simulated annealing (MOSA) proposed by Loukil et al. (2005) in the same simulated data, and compare the performance of these algorithms.The experiment results shows that we can get more complete approximated efficient solutions set of most experiment problem from two MOACS algorithms than MOSA. It proved that MOACS is adaptable to be used to solve multi-objective scheduling problems.
