複合式繞射光學元件影像擷取鏡頭設計
Hybrid(Refractive Diffractive)Lens Design for Image Pick up
複合式(折射/繞射)光學元件、評價函數、色差、成像品質
中文摘要    微光學元件可以是折射、繞射或複合式（折射 繞射）光學元件所組成。繞射光學鏡片在設計上提供較多的參數，修正波前的形狀，缺點是其強烈的負色散。因此繞射光學透鏡大部分應用於單色光上。對於寬頻的應用，繞射光學元件（diffractive optical element, DOE）結合折射光學元件矯正色差。這種結合讓系統變得輕巧，或僅由一種材料組成。    目前在影像擷取鏡頭上尚未有大量DOE被運用，因其色散校正尚需與折射元件搭配，在設計上評價函數（merit function）的設定有其難度，本論文即以此為題做較為深入的研究。    在鏡片設計上，我們希望能夠以一片複合式DOE鏡片來取代傳統多片式鏡片設計，來達到輕薄短小與降低成本的目的。在論文中首先比較折射式與繞射式光學元件的差異，並介紹繞射光學元件的基本理論。在設計上首先了解影像感測器（image sensor）的規格，透過公式計算出光學鏡頭所需設計的規格。藉由鏡片設計軟體（ZEMAX），依序設計雙球面、單非球面、雙非球面折射式鏡片及複合式雙非球面繞射鏡片，最後比較設計結果並做成像分析。    由設計結果發現，複合式DOE鏡片的確可以改善色差，並提升成像品質，在元件製作上也已經達到可以製作的標準。關鍵詞：複合式（折射 繞射）光學元件，評價函數，色差，成像品質。
Abstract    Micro-optical elements can be refractive, diffractive or hybrid (refractive diffractive). The design of diffractive optical lenses provides more parameters to adjust the shape of wavefront, but its drawback is the strong negative dispersion. Diffractive optics are therefore mostly used with single color light. For broadband applications, DOE (diffractive of element) is combined with refractive optics to correct for the chromatic aberration. The combination allows systems with low weight, or which consist of only one material.    DOE has not been largely applied to image pick-up lenses nowadays. DOE has to combine with refractive optics to correct dispersion, so it has many difficulties of merit function setting of designing.    For lens designing, we expect to make one single hybrid lens to replace multiple lenses in tradition in order to minimize the size and to reduce the cost.    At the beginning of the essay, we compare the differences between “refractive optical elements” and “diffractive optical elements”. Then, we introduce the fundamental theory of diffractive optical elements. Before designing the lens, we find out the specification of the sensor and use a formula to calculate the specification of the optical lens, which we need to design. With a lens designing software, ZEMAX, we design lenses in the order as following bi-spherical, single aspheric, bi-aspheric refractive lenses and hybrid bi-aspheric diffractive lenses. Last, we compare the designing results and analyze their images.    According to the designing result, a hybrid DOE lens indeed can correct chromatic aberration and improve the quality of images. Besides, the designing result has met the practical standard of element production.Keyword hybrid (refractive diffractive) element, merit function, chromatic aberration, quality of image.
