視訊產業物流委外之成本效益分析-A公司之個案研究視訊產業物流委外成本效益分析-A公司之個案研究
The Cost-Benefit Analysis of Logistics Outsourcing in Video Industry-- A case study
物流管理、第三方物流、成本效益分析

顧客服務乃在以有效成本的方式，提供供應鏈顧客顯著的附加價值利益的程序。因應市場競爭與激烈的挑戰，企業應思考如何有效運用外在多元性資源，以獲取生存與競爭的利益，隨著第三方專業物流的掘起，國內企業之間得以全方位的思維與協同合作方式，為供應鏈中的各企業夥伴降低物流成本、增加整體的利潤，使企業專注於核心能力的發展。本研究以台灣視訊流通市場之企業為研究對象，採用個案研究及實際訪談的方法進行成本效益分析，目的在於瞭解物流委外的實質效益，並根據針對研究結果，對其它企業提出建言。本研究首先將整理國內外和物流有關的文獻，以作為本研究理論架構的基礎，接著建構物流委外之成本效益分析架構，透過實地調查的分析結果，瞭解個案企業對於物流委外的動機及現況；最後比較個案企業在物流委外前後的營業績效，以驗證物流委外之實際成本節省效益。本研究完成，除提供國內企業能在物流委外決策及目標訂定上有所有幫助外，對於後續物流委外相關研究及實務工作上有一定的參考價值。
Customer service is a process of providing significant value-added benefit to the supply chain by a cost-effective way. This definition reveals the thinking of customer service as a process-focused orientation that includes supply chain management concept. To cope with the severe marketing competition and challenges, companies should think over how to utilize the diversified resource from outside effectively to strive for survival and acquire the competitive advantage.  The rapid rising of the third party logistics has provided companies with a totally different new way of seeking a direction to coordinate   the various partners among the supply chain. It helps them not only to reduce the logistics cost, but also to focus themselves on the establishment of core competence.Through methods of both case study and interview, this thesis has scrutinized some of the video product venders in Taiwan market about their cost-benefit analysis of the logistic operation. The main purpose of this thesis is to search for a useful frame work for companies to evaluate the advantages of hiring the service of third-party logistics.First of all, the frame work of this research has been made by referring to articles relating to logistics. Based on a cost-benefit analysis, the second part of the thesis is to realize motivations and current conditions of interviewed corporations, who hire outsourcing logistics service. In the final part of the thesis, it has been found that outsourcing logistics does add value to the corporations by comparing the business achievement before and after hiring the outsourcing logistics service.The expected contribution of this thesis is to be a help for corporations when they are making their strategies about outsourcing logistics as well as setting up the target. It is also hoped that the thesis can provide value to the future study and the real task related to outsourcing logistics.
