訊息內容、閱讀動機與知覺風險對消費者電子口耳相傳行為之影響
Effects of Message Types, Motives for Reading Information, and Perceived Risk on the Acceptance and Transmission of Electronic Word-Of-Mouth Communication
口耳相傳、負面訊息、知覺風險、工具性訊息、情感性訊息、線上閱讀意見動機

電子口耳相傳已經成為消費者獲取資訊的一項重要來源，對於商品或服務不滿意的消費者會將他們不愉快的經驗發表於網路上的意見平台中，其他消費者閱讀且相信該訊息後會對訊息中所指涉的店家產生抵制行為，或進一步散佈此負面訊息。因此，電子口耳相傳對廠商產生極大的影響，特別是販售服務的廠商。本研究以負面訊息為背景，討論其下的電子口耳相傳行為，探討訊息內容(工具性、情感性)、消費者閱讀線上意見的動機(資訊動機、社群動機)、產品知覺風險(高、低)，與消費者信任傾向對負面訊息的意見接受度、傳遞意圖，及抵制意圖的影響。本研究採用2*2*2的實驗設計，並以操弄的方式營造變數情境，結果顯示所有的操弄均十分成功並顯示出良好的信度。在假設檢定部分，本研究以MANCOVA分析來驗證假設，結果顯示，工具性訊息較情感性訊息更有影響力；因為社群動機而閱讀意見的消費者對於訊息有較高的傳遞意圖；消費者對於負面訊息中知覺風險越高的店家產生越高的抵制意圖。另外，本研究亦發現訊息內容與閱讀動機具有交互作用，意即因為社群動機而閱讀線上意見的消費者對於訊息內容較為敏感。最後，研究結果也指出，信任傾向越高的消費者對於訊息有越高的意見接受度。本研究結果可以提供給對電子口耳相傳有興趣的學者作為參考，另外，本研究亦包含管理意涵及對未來研究的建議。
Electronic word-of-mouth (WOM) communication has become an important source of information for consumers. Dissatisfied consumers may post their bad experiences on opinion platforms and others who read and believe the messages may boycott the stores mentioned or diffuse the messages further. Thus, electronic WOM has a powerful impact on firms, especially for service industries. This study examines the characteristics of negative messages on the Internet forums. The main purpose of this research is to discuss the impact of message types (instrumental- versus affective-focused), consumers’ motives for reading information on the Internet (informational versus interpersonal motives), service characteristics (high versus low perceived risk), and consumer personal factors (disposition to trust) on opinion acceptance, boycott intention, and transmission intention of negative Internet messages. One 2×2×2 experiment was conducted and scenarios were designed to manipulate the factors. All manipulation checks were successful and all measures showed good reliability. MANCOVA was conducted to test the hypotheses. The experimental results show that instrumental-focused messages are more influential than affective-focused messages. Moreover, messages on the interpersonal-motivated forums are more likely to be transmitted than messages on the informational-motivated forums. Furthermore, consumers have higher boycott intentions towards high perceived risk services after reading negative messages. Besides, there is a significant interaction effect between message types and motives for reading information. Specifically, consumers who read messages on the interpersonal motive forums are more sensitive to different message contents. Finally, disposition to trust is positively related to acceptance of opinion. Some managerial implications and future research suggestions are also proposed.
