警察機關受理報案e化平臺與服務品質之關聯性探討—以臺北縣政府警察局為例
THE RESEARCH OF DEALING WITH THE REPORT OF E-PLATFORM AND SERVICE QUALITY，S CONNECTION----TO USE AS AN EXAMPLE FOR TAIPEI COUNTY GOVERNMENT POLICE BUREAU
電子化、電子化服務、服務品質、顧客滿意度、滿意度、警察機關受理報案電子化平臺

提供優質電子化服務，是世界各國政府與企業共同的趨勢，亦是國內警政單位發展重點。本研究主要以問卷調查法，探討目前警察機關試辦受理報案電子化平臺與服務品質之關聯性。問卷設計，係參考自Parasuraman，Zeithaml與Berry於1988年修正之「SERVQUAL」量表；樣本則選自臺北縣政府警察局永和分局、板橋分局與基隆市警察局第一分局各一個派出所，並以簡單抽樣方式訪問每一位報案民眾。本研究總計發出450份問卷，有效問卷為349份。經統計分析，獲致主要結論為：民眾前往電子化程度高之警察機關報案（基隆第一分局與永和分局），其滿意度顯著高於電子化程度低之警察機關（板橋分局）（p≦0.001）。文中除對警察機關受理報案e化平臺與服務品質關聯性作深入探討外，更於文末提出，警察機關持續提供e化服務是未來發展趨勢、警察機關應擴大試辦受理報案e化平臺措施、警察機關應提供專業化服務項目、增加提供網路報案與e化交通事故處理功能的可行建議。並提出針對內部顧客─員警之滿意度如何？及深入瞭解其他e化系統，如全國治安管制系統、智慧型勤務指揮系統效能的未來研究方向。
Providing the excellent electronic on-line service is a common trend to all the world’s governments and enterprises.  It is also a very important development focus of Taiwan’s Police Department.This study employed the method of survey to discuss the relation between the e-police platform which is currently on a trail of handling the crime report through the on-line system, and the service quality of Taiwan Police Department.The design of this survey was based on Parasuraman, Zeithaml and Berry’s (1988 ) ”Servqual” chart.  The samples were selected from three police branch offices in Taipei County—Yong He, Bang Chou, and Kee Lung.All people who went to those three police branch offices to report cases during the research period were asked to fill out the questionnaires. There were a total of 450 surveys, but only 349 were valid to use. Via statistical analysis, the conclusion of the study is that the publics have better satisfactions for the high electronic level police branch offices (Yong He, Kee Lung) than the lower one (Bang Chou). This study suggests that Taiwan’s Police Department should (1) constantly provide e-service since it is a future tendency (2) enlarge the current e-platform (3) provide more service items (4) improve the dealing function of on-line crime reporting and traffic troubles.As to the future research direction, the study suggests the Police Department of Taiwan to investigate the satisfaction of e-platform among the police inner groups. Besides, the deeper understanding of the efficiency of “National Public Security Control System” and “Intelligent Duty Command System” also should be drawing a better attention in further study.
