護理小站於社區醫療群之行動研究
An Action Research Of The Practice Nurse's Station Within Polyklinik In Taiwan
家庭醫師、社區醫療群、護理小站

「社區醫療群」是近幾年來衛生署及健保局推動的重要政策之ㄧ，希望藉此能推動家庭醫師制度，導正民眾的就醫習慣，推行雙向轉診，俾使醫療資源能夠有效利用，而這樣的試辦計畫中，除需基層醫師的配合之外，若能加入其他醫療團隊，對此計劃之推動或有不同的成效；本研究目的有三：（一）瞭解某社區醫療群與家庭醫師目前實務工作與執行照護現況（二）瞭解社區民眾實際需要照護內容（三）探索社區專科護理師於社區醫療群中可發揮的角色功能與實務工作內容。本研究採用行動研究法，第一階段為前趨計畫，以雙和醫療群家庭醫師與家庭會員為研究對象，蒐集資料的方法為文獻分析、參與觀察及半結構式問卷訪談；第二階段依前趨研究的結果，著手規劃護理小站執行護理業務內容計畫，並展開執行介入行動。研究結果發現：社區醫療群醫師組成方式，各自有參與的動機緣由，且在民眾仍擁有就醫選擇情況下，難達醫療群之整體性的健康照護目的。社區民眾實際需要照護內容多為「保健照護指導」「心理衛生的防治」「預防保健服務的宣導」。社區護理人員於社區醫療群中可發揮的專業角色功能為「協調」「衛教指導」「顧問諮詢」者。社區護理小站可執行的實務工作內容為門診照護衛教指導、家庭訪視、電話訪問、團體衛教指導、協助看診、心理諮商與支持等項目。建議：政府宜積極宣導社區醫療群「家庭醫師制」、專科護理人員之角色須由政府予法定定位。
Community integrated medical team which is called Polyklinik in the following section has been the one of main policies boosted by The Department of Health and the Bureau of National Health Insurance in recent years to enhance family medical system and direct resident’s habit of taking medical care. By introducing two-way referral, medical resources are used effectively. An action research was introduced to the community care doctors, the key members of Polyklinik, allowing them to understand that the outcomes for their clinic practices depend.Purposes1.  to understand the practices of Polyklinik in the community.2.  to understand the health care needs of local residents.3.  to search the role of nursing experts and develop the possible role and function in the Polyklinik.Method action research was conducted in this study and mainly contained two periods. The first period was preparing stage and recruited target members from Polyklinik registered name list. The second period followed by the result from the first stage and repeating the ‘Observation- refection-planning and action.’ four cycle. Data collection included reference analysis, participating observation notes, and interview content and a semi- structured questionnaire.Findings Inner conflict among the Polyklinik key members and the complexity of Taiwan National Health Insurance caused unsatisfactory outcomes of Polyklinik. In addition, the role of nursing experts within Polyklinik acts as a "communicator", a "instructor of health promotion" and a "consultant". Finally , the health care needs for local residents included "healthy caring instructing", " prevention mental health", and " prevention of health and hygiene". Concluded the final outcomes from above study the researcher suggests that a Practice Nurse`s station can provide the services such as care instruction and primary health assessment, family visit, telephone interviewing, public health promotion, mental health counseling, and running the supporting group in the community. Nevertheless, the official policy maker should impetus Polyklinik and the nursing experts in the community should be entitled legally.
