資源配置觀點之企業價值分析
Business Analysis and Valuation from the Perspective of Resources Deployment
資源配置、股東權益報酬率、企業價值、市值帳面價值比
本文主要以資源配置的觀點，視企業價值由四種資源（控制、影響、未來、財務）之配置運作而來，目的在於探討資源配置觀點是否在解釋企業價值時優於傳統拆解方式，並進而探討個別資源對企業價值的影響方向。因此將企業之股東權益報酬率拆解為控制資源股東權益報酬率（CROE）、股東權益報酬率（IROE）、股東權益報酬率（FuROE）、財務資源股東權益報酬率（FiROE），利用資源配置拆解法與傳統DuPont股東權益報酬率拆解法進行比較。另外，將董監酬勞事酬勞與員工分紅費用化及非經常性項目調整納入考量，將原本資源配置觀點模型加以修正。實証上將企業價值劃分為短期股價報酬率與長期企業價值（Tobin’s Q）作為迴歸分析之應變數。比較四模型後可知，採用資源配置觀點拆解股東權益報酬率對企業價值之解釋能力較佳，而將董監酬勞事與員工分紅費用化及非經常性項目納入調整後，對企業價值解釋能力亦有所提升。此外將實證模型內之參數結果整理如下：由模型一（Du Pont拆解之三變數為自變數）之實證結果可知，構成股東權益報酬率之三個比率中，純益率的上升對長、短期企業價值均有正向影響；總資產週轉率短期影響不一定，長期則為正向；財務槓桿對長、短期影響均為不一定。由模型二（資源配置觀點拆解法）之實證結果可知，控制資源股東權益報酬率對長短期之企業價值均有正向影響；影響資源股東權益報酬率對短期企業價值為正向影響，長期則不一定；未來資源股東權益報酬率對短期企業價值影響為不一定，長期則為正向影響；財務資源股東權益報酬率對長、短期企業價值影響均為不一定。
This thesis discusses business analysis and valuation from the perspective of resources deployment by decomposing ROE into CROE（ROE of Controlling Resource）, IROE（ROE of Influencing Resource）, FuROE（ROE of Future Resource）and FiROE（ROE of Financial Resource）. It investigates the correlation between each of the four ROE components and business value. The main purpose is to compare the explanatory power of the proposed ROE decomposition method against that of the traditional method such as the Du Pont Identity. Furthermore, this thesis conducts various sensitivity analyses by revising the measurements of components through the expensing of directors and employee bonus payments and the exclusion of non-recurring items. Empirical investigations on firm value creation are conducted on the bases of both short-term stock return and long-term Tobin’s Q.The results of regression analysis show that the proposed ROE decomposition method has a greater explanatory power with respect to both short- and long-term business value implications than the Du-Pont Identity. In addition, expensing directors and employee bonus payments and excluding non-recurring items can also increase the explanatory power of the model. Therefore, if business value is the major concern, proposed ROE decomposition method can be a step taken to enhance the valuation validity.The other results of regression analysis are as followsThe traditional decomposition method used is the Du-Pont identity (Model 1), which decomposes ROE into three ratios, sales margin, asset turnover and financial leverage. The results demonstrate that sales margin has a positive correlation with both short- and long-term business values. Asset turnover does not have a clear direction of association with short-term business value, but is positive related to long-term business value. Financial leverage does not have a clear direction of association with either short- or long-term business value.The results of proposed ROE decomposition method (Model 2) show that ROE of controlling resource is positively related to both short- and long-term business values. ROE of influencing resource is positive related to short-term business value, but does not have a clear direction of association with long-term value. ROE of future resource on the other hand, is positive related to long-term value but does not have a clear direction of association with short-term business value. Finally, ROE of financing resource does not have a clear direction of association with either short- or long-term business value.
