資訊產品流通業-印表機行銷通路的研究
A Study on the Distribution of Printers in the Industry of Computer and Digital Technology
時間序列、ARIMA、ACF、PACF、差分、殘差、資訊產品流通業
印表機隨著電腦的發展與數位科技的發達而普遍化，使之幾乎成為每間公司、家庭或個人的必備品。但是在原廠經常推陳出新的情況下，產品經常在更換，幾乎每三個月就會有新產品問世，使得代理商在囤貨及銷貨的控管上很難拿捏，而且各個製造商在產品的研發上總是不遺餘力，競爭相當激烈，產品生命週期短，上、中、下游供應鏈稍有不慎即造成來不及供貨等商機的損失或存貨無法出清，淪為倉庫呆滯料的窘境。因此本研究的主要目的是希望以過去的銷售實績利用時間序列模型以預測印表機在各行銷通路的銷售狀況，藉由此客觀的統計科學預測方法，做為以後進貨的參考 。本次透過時間序列方法的ARIMA Model尋找到的可用模型與ASTSA中的ARIMA search做比較，就預測而言，經與資訊通路商實際對照後的確有其參考價值，本方法未來不僅能在印表機的預測上發生作用，更能在其它資訊產品上套用，相信對於資訊產品流通業有其正面及相輔相成的義意。
With the rapid development of computer and digital technology, printers have become so common that almost every company, home, and even individual can have one. Yet, as printer manufacturers keep introducing new models into the market, and old models are constantly replaced by new ones at a rate of every three months, printer distributors have found it very difficult to fully take control of its inventory and distribution. Moreover, the fierce competition among printer manufacturers in terms of developing new models always cuts short of a printer’s life span. It follows either that distributors may often lose opportunities of making more profit, due to their failure to obtain timely supply; or that they may be threatened by inventory pressure, due to their failure to clean up their stock.The purpose of this study is to predict (forecast), by a time-serial model, how printers may sell through different distribution channels. It is hoped that such an object approach, statistically derived in its nature, can be a valuable reference for most supply and distribution systems.This study primarily employs the ARIMA MODEL to find a workable model. As for its strength of predicting (forecasting), the model has shown great reliability after being applied to the inventory and distribution system of W company. This approach can be applied not only to supply and distribution systems, not also to those of other computer and digital products. It is believed to be able to bring great support to the distributors of computer and digital technology.
