賭博犯罪因素之研究-以臺北縣為例
The Factors of illegal Gambling and Crime in Taipei County.
賭博犯罪、賭博犯罪因素
摘    要題目：賭博犯罪因素之研究－以臺北縣為例校（院）系所組別：輔仁大學管理學院應用統計研究所研究生：廖淦龍  指導教授：陳瑞照博士  論文頁數：88頁關鍵詞：賭博犯罪，賭博犯罪因素。論文摘要內容：臺灣地區賭博犯罪手法不斷的翻新，其問題更牽涉社會、政治、經濟、民眾意向等諸多層面，後續衍生偷竊、搶奪、強盜等犯罪，造成再次犯罪的不良後果，導致許多人傾家蕩產、家庭破碎，人與人間失去信賴的基礎。故本研究期藉台北縣為研究地區範圍，對於賭博犯罪者的探討：1、瞭解台北縣賭博犯罪的現況。2、探討發生賭博犯罪案件之城鄉、性別、年齡、職業、場所、習性的差異，以找出形成重要因素。3、分析新興賭博犯罪案件之犯罪者的個人特性，作為執法機關制定偵查作為、預防措施及矯治機關擬訂輔導、再教育之參考策略。本文研究對象以2004年1月-2005年3月間在台北縣境內犯賭博案件，經警察機關移送偵辦之犯罪嫌疑人，以嫌疑犯的特性，如性別、年齡、犯罪方法、、、等12個變數進行研究。資料分析方法採用：次數分配及百分百分析、獨立性檢定、關聯分析、自動互動檢視法分析、分類與迴歸樹狀法。結果發現，台北縣境內治安未發現有賭博犯罪集團，犯罪者為男性、41-50歲、高中（職）教育程度犯案者最多。犯罪者使用犯罪工具中以賭博性電玩犯罪最多，犯罪發生原因最多以貪心謀財或投機者居多，且多發生於商家或便利商店，發生地點以人口數多、地區複雜之市、鎮、鄉為主，本文並提供具體建議供有關單位參考。
AbstractTitle of Thesis：The Factors of illegal Gambling and Crime in Taipei County.Name of Institute：Graduate Institute of Applied Statistics, College of Management,Fu Jen Catholic UniversityName of Student：Liaw, Gann-Long  Advisor：Chen, Juei-Chao  Total Pages：88Key Words： Factors of illegal gambling, Gambling-related Crime.Abstract：Due to the fact that illegal gambling or gamblers kept on renew its techniques these years, it causes serious social, political, and economical problems. Furthermore, it evokes social problems, for example, theft and robbery, hence compound the outcomes of gambling crime. Therefore, it made a lot of these people bankrupted, caused family discords and violated the trust among each others in this society. Accordingly, in this research, we are going to investigate the gamblers in Taipei County and get to know 1.Understand the present status of gambling crime in Taipei County. 2. Discuss the difference between the case of gamblers' gender, age, occupation, habits and the place where the gambling take place in order to find its factors. 3. Analyze the delinquent's' personality as a base of ways for police force to prevent gambling crime, to rectify and educate the delinquent's behavior.The object of this research are criminals or suspects who were taken into custody because of convicting gambling crime in which had taken place between 2004.1 to 2005.3.We use the suspects' characteristics, for example, gender, age and it's ways of committing the crime. Statistical Methods were applied to analyze data.As a result, we found out that there are not any specific gambling gangs exist in Taipei County and that the suspects are mostly male, age of 41-50, and a high-school-graduate. Suspects gamble via video games and its reason to gamble is because of its avaricious behavior. Most gambling crimes take place in shops or convenient stores that contain quite amount of people and places that basically have a high crime-rate. This research provides specific suggestions for units that are concern of the problems of illegal gambling.
