足球運動教練專業知識與技術能力之研究
The Study of Professional Knowledge and Skill Competencies in Soccer Coaches
足球、運動教練、研究者、顯著性、代表隊、關鍵詞、平均數、專業知識與技術能力
本研究之主要目的，在於針對足球運動教練進行專業知識與技術能力的重要程度與具備程度之調查，主要內容包含受訪者對於專業知識與技術能力在重要程度的認知評定與專業知識與技術能力在具備程度的自我評定，並以研究者自編之「足球運動教練專業知識與技術能力研究之調查問卷」為工具，進行資料之收集，共計76份有效問卷。資料處理工具為SPSS for Windows 10.0版統計軟體，並以平均數、標準差、獨立樣本t檢定（t test）及單因子變異數分析（One-way ANOVA）等統計方法處理、分析，結果發現：一、在本研究調查中，足球運動教練以取得「國家A級」證書、「30-34歲」、「研究所」畢業及教練年資在「4-6年」之間的「男性」為主，目前大部分是擔任「學校專任體育教師兼教練」，且以帶「大專」隊及曾經帶過「國家代表隊」為最多。另外過去以擔任「國家代表隊」的選手居多。二、足球運動教練評定專業知識與技術能力的「重要程度」，主要以「比賽戰術與戰略應用」為最高。三、足球運動教練評定專業知識與技術能力之「具備程度」，主要以「足球基本技術訓練與操作能力」為主。四、在不同「曾經帶隊參賽最高層級」、「目前帶隊層級」、「從事教練工作年資」及「擔任選手時之最高層級」的足球運動教練對專業知識與技術能力的重要程度之評定有顯著性差異。五、在不同「性別」、「教育程度」、「目前帶隊層級」、「職別」、「年齡」、「從事教練工作年資」、「擔任選手時之最高層級」的足球運動教練對專業知識與技術能力的具備程度之評定有顯著性差異。六、足球運動教練的專業知識與技術能力在「足球運動起源與發展」、「足球訓練相關理論」、「足球基本技術訓練與操作方法」、「足球運動體能訓練方法與操作能力」、「比賽戰術與戰略應用」、「運動傷害防護與管理能力」、「訓練計劃擬定與執行能力」、「行政工作配合與參與組織實施能力」等具備程度與重要程度之評定上，有顯著性相關。關鍵詞：足球、運動教練、專業知識與技術能力
The purpose of this study was to understand the important degree and complete degree of professional knowledge and skill competencies in soccer coaches. The researcher-designed questionnaire was used to collect data with 76 soccer coaches. The SPSS for Windows 10.0 software was used to analyze data through means, standard deviation, t-test and one way ANOVA. The results were followed1. The soccer coaches investigated in this study were male in primary with getting A-grade certification, 30- to 34-year-old of age, graduate degree and 4- to 6-year of length of service. Most of them were PE teacher with coach simultaneously and had led the university and college team as well as national representative team. Otherwise, most of them were athletes of national representative team.2. The most important degree of professional knowledge and skill competencies in soccer coaches were “the application of tactic and strategy in game.3. The most complete degree of professional knowledge and skill competencies in soccer coaches were “the basic soccer technological training and operation capability.”4. There was significant difference on the important degree of professional knowledge and skill competencies in soccer coaches’ “the highest game level,” “team level,” “length of service,” and “the highest athletic level.”5. There was significant difference on the complete degree of professional knowledge and skill competencies in soccer coaches’ “sex,” “education degree,” “the highest game level,” “vocation,” “age,” “length of service,” and “the highest athletic level.”6. There were partial significant correlations between the 10 important degree dimensions and the 10 complete degree dimensions.Keywords soccer, sports coaches, professional knowledge and skill   competencies
