迷信消費利益與成本之探討
The benefits and costs of superstitious consumption
迷信消費、迷信、探索性因素分析、消費利益、消費成本

迷信的現象普遍存在商業行為中，或多或少都曾經影響消費者行為，而迷信消費究竟帶給消費者那些利益與成本，故本研究的目的在於探討國人迷信消費利益及成本，以探索性因素分析統計方法分析及歸類，並發展出一些構面，分別如下：迷信消費利益構面為「解決問題」、「安心」、「群體影響力」、「裝飾美觀」四大因素構面，迷信消費成本構面為「商品功效上的擔心」、「副作用」、「改變目標的成本」、「社會同儕」、「財務面」、「本身的適用性」、「個人風格」七大因素構面。探討人口統計的變數對迷信消費利益及成本的影響，女性重視「安心」的迷信利益；年齡愈小迷信消費者，愈在乎「群體影響力」的利益；北部都會區消費者重視「安心」、「裝飾美觀」的利益；教育程度愈高愈重視「裝飾美觀」的利益。年齡小的消費者族群中，迷信消費成本也非常在乎「社會同儕」的構面；學生擔心迷信成本的「社會同儕」構面；北部都會區消費者擔心迷信成本的「商品功效上的擔心」、「財務面」，而在大學生的消費族群中，擔心迷信成本的「商品功效上的擔心」、「改變目標的成本」、「社會同儕」、「財務面」構面。
There are many superstitious phenomena in business activities, and frequently they influence consumer behaviors. The superstitious consumption has some benefits and costs, and the purpose of this study is to find some benefits and costs of superstitious consumption. According to the steps of exploratory factor analysis (EFA), the benefits and costs of the superstitious consumption has been constructed. The benefits of superstitious consumption are divided into 4 factors. These factors include “functional,” “psychological,” “social”, and “visual.” The costs of superstitious consumption are divided into 7 factors. These factors include “worry about product’s effect,” “side effect,” “cost of change,” “peer opinion,” “financial risk,” “self applicability,” and “self style.”Another goal of this research is to explore vital statistics about superstitious consumption in Taiwan. The results find that women attach great importance to the benefit of “psychological” in superstitious consumption. Young consumers attach great importance to the benefit of “social” in superstitious consumption. The consumers in the north Taiwan attach great importance to “psychological” and “visual.” Consumers with higher education attach great importance to “visual.” Young consumers attach great importance to the cost of “peer opinion” in superstitious consumption. The consumers in the north Taiwan attach great importance to “worry about product’s effect” and “financial risk.” Undergraduate students attach great importance to the “worry about product’s effect,” “cost of change,” “peer opinion,” and “financial risk.”
