通路結構、交易關係與通路績效之研究以台灣塑橡膠機械業為例
The research of relation between market channel structure、trade relation mix and channel performance in Taiwan Plastic Machinery Industry
通路結構、通路策略、通路績效

塑橡膠機械工業是標準的傳統產業，在台發展超過30年。目前台灣塑橡膠機械工業以外銷為主，外銷比例已達78%。我國塑橡膠機械工業亮眼的外銷成績背後所採用通路策略與績效之間的關係實有深入探討之必要。本研究的目的是要探討台灣塑橡膠機械製造產業通路結構性策略與績效關係，藉以了解其產業通路結構性策略對通路績效的關係受交易關係的影響程度。首先將整理國內外和通路策略、通路績效有關的文獻，以作為本研究發展理論架構的基礎。接著對參加2006台北國際塑橡膠工業展覽會之台灣塑橡膠機械製造商進行問卷調查，經由敘述性統計分析、變異數分析等統計方法，企圖找出台灣塑橡膠機械製造產業通路結構性策略對通路績效的關係受通路交易關係的影響程度。本研究共計發出354份網路邀請函，共回收118份，扣除掉回答不完全的樣本數4個，有效樣本達114個，佔總邀請數32.2%。研究結果發現：1.採取「中度」價格條件的公司，其通路整合度會影響通路績效；且在「中度」價格條件的公司下，採取傳統式行銷系統公司績效擊敗契約式行銷系統公司。2.無論採取哪種通路結構性策略，對通路績效都沒有顯著影響力。根據研究發現，本研究建議：1.傳統式通路結構策略的公司，應採取「中庸」價格條件策略。2.製造商考慮通路策略時不必將通路結構性策略納入考慮。製造商可以將資源加以分配至其他地方，像是通路成員銷售性激勵活動(如提供通路成員免費展示商品、與通路成員合作廣告)等等有助於提昇銷售的活動。
Taiwan Plastic Machinery Industry (TPMI) is a traditional industry and has developed over 30 years. The major sales of TPMI comes from export; Export ratio has already reached 78%.Therefore, it is necessary to probe onto the relations between channel performance and the channel strategies adopted by manufacturers behind TPMI’s sparkling export sales.The purpose of this research proposes to find out the relations between channel structure and channel performance of TPMI so as to understand the extent to which trade relations mix is influenced by the relations between channel structure and channel performance of TPMI. First, we review the related literatures regarding channel strategies and performance to build a theory foundation, and then conduct a survey toward TPMI manufacturers that attended 2006 TAIPEI PLAS exhibition, with an attempt to find the influential extent and level mentioned above via descriptive statistics and Two-way ANOVA.354 copies of questionnaire had been sent, 118 copies returned, and after deducting 4 copies of incomplete questionnaires, we have 114 copies (or 32.2%) of valid samples which provided valuable information for this research1.The manufacturers whom selected “Mezzo” price term, their choice on channel integration would effect channel performance; as well as under “Mezzo” price term, the channel performance of manufacturers adopting conventional marketing channel will beat the contractual VMS manufacturers.2.No matter which kind of channel structure strategies is selected by manufacturers, there is no significant influence on channel performance.The research proposes that1.Manufacturers with conventional marketing channel should select “Mezzo” price term strategy.2.As long as channel strategies are concerned, it is not necessary for manufacturers to take channel structure strategies into consideration. Manufacturers may distribute source to other fields, such as channel sales-motivated activities to increase sales.
