運動營隊參與者服務品質認知與滿意度之研究－以2006年兄弟象棒球冬令營為例
A Study of Sport Camp Participants' Perception of Service Quality and Satisfaction － The Case of 2006 Brother Baseball  Winter Camp
兄弟象棒球冬令營、服務品質、滿意度
本研究主要探討參與者對兄弟象棒球冬令營服務品質認知、參與滿意度及人口統計變數之差異情形，再分析參與者感受服務品質與參與滿意度之相關情形與認知服務品質對參與滿意度的預測情形。對象為2006年兄弟象棒球冬令營之參與者。    本研究採用普遍調查法，總計發出問卷360份，回收322 份，有效問卷為268份，有效問卷回收率為83.2%。根據實際調查所得資料，以描述性統計、單因子變異數分析、雪費事後比較、皮爾遜積差相關、逐步多元迴歸等統計方法進行資料分析得以下結論與建議：一、兄弟象棒球冬令營參與者以男性（93.3％）比例為絕大多數；年    齡以國小高年級學童（37.7％）比例最高；居住地區以北部地區   （89.6％）比例為絕大多數；參加班別以進階班（62.7％）比例最    高；參加次數以第一次參加（48.9％）比例最高；是否為象迷俱    樂部會員以目前不是會員，但參與冬令營後有意願加入會員（59    ％）比例最高。二、期望服務品質各構面分析部分，各構面之排序為1、保證性；2、    關懷性；3、有形性；4、回應性。認知服務品質構面分析部分，    各構面之排序為1、保證性；2、關懷性；3、回應性；4、有形性。三、參與者滿意度各構面之排序為1、服務人員態度；2、組織形象與運動氣氛；3、環境安全與衛生；4、場地設施規劃；5、訂價標準。四、對於期望服務品質與認知服務品質構面進行分析，發現參與者在「保證性」、「關懷性」、「回應性」、「有形性」構面中，期望與認知服務品質之間有差異存在。五、不同「參加班別」、「參加次數」之兄弟象棒球冬令營對參與滿意度呈顯著差異。六、服務品質要求愈高，參與者的滿意程度即會愈高。七、感受服務品質之有形性構面對「服務人員態度」與「場地設施規    劃」具有預測力；感受服務品質之回應性構面對「服務人員態度」、   「環境安全與衛生」、「組織形象與運動氣氛」、「訂價標準」具   有預測力。八、兄弟象棒球營隊經營者可以擴展目標市場至中南部地區，並且開   拓女性市場，同時加強教練團隊能力，豐富營隊內容。
This research mainly studied the differences in three aspects perceived service quality, satisfaction and population variables among the participants.The differences of participants anticipation against service quality perception were been analyzed first, followed by the analysis of the relevance between service quality received by participants and participants’ satisfaction as well as the projection on the service quality perceived and degrees of satisfaction. The participants of this research were the members of Brother Baseball Winter Camp.This research was conducted through questionary survey, random proportion sampling. The total samples given out were 322 copies, and the effective samples collected were 268, effective sample collection percentage was 83.2%. Data was analyzed by the method of descriptive and inferential statistics, including one-way ANOVA, Pearson product-moment correlation, and multiple stepwise regression. The major findings and suggestion in this study were described as follows1.  Male participant percentage was 93.3％.   As to the level of education, fifth and sixtieth grades in elementary school degree participants dominate.  North residents proportion was higher than other areas. Most of the members take part in advanced class, and half of the members participating Brother baseball winter camp first time.2.  The following ranking resulted from this research were the participant anticipation towards every aspects of service quality(1)Assurance(2)Empathy(3)Tangibility(4)ResponsivenessAnd the service quality perceived by participants resulted from this research were ranked as below(1)Assurance(2)Empathy(3)Responsiveness(4)Tangibility3.  The research also concluded the following rankings as aspects of participants’ satisfaction(1)Attitudes of attendants(2)Public image of organization and athletic atmosphere(3)Environment safety and sanitation(4)Sports facility arrangements(5)Pricing4.  Significant differences were found in the service quality anticipated and perceived by participants in the aspects of “assurance”, “empathy”, “responsiveness”, and “tangibility”.5.  The kind of class and the times of participating were influential factors trigger participants’ satisfaction towards Brother Baseball Winter Camp.6.  The findings of this research showed that the aspects of service quality assurance, responsiveness, tangibility and empathy are positively relevant to participants satisfaction from the following aspects attendants attitude, environment safety and sanitation, facility service, public image of the organization and athletic atmosphere and pricing.7.  The research showed that responsiveness and tangibility of service quality are predictors to attendant attitude and facility arrangement; responsiveness is also predictor to environment safety and sanitation, public organization image and athletic atmosphere and pricing.8.  The manager of Brother Baseball Winter Camp may expand the goal market to the south and central area, and developing the female market, at the same time strengthening the ability of training team, and enriching the camp content.
