運動休閒服消費者行為之研究
A Study of Consumer Behaviors of Sports and Leisure Wear(
運動休閒服、生活型態、消費者行為
有鑒於休閒運動日益盛行，現代人對於休閒運動的觀念也隨這社會的多元化的改變而呈現愈來愈重視的趨勢，再加上政府一直積極鼓勵全民運動的風氣，藉以提升了精神面的生活方式，以致於不論男女老少皆普遍參與各項運動活動，因此強調舒適又輕鬆的運動休閒服隨之普遍化。本研究透過問卷調查欲透過生活型態，人口統計變數，運動休閒服飾之功能與購買行為四個變數，對象乃對台北地區的民眾採簡易隨機取樣方式施放問卷，實際施測問卷後，實得有效問卷176份，然後試圖以敘述性統計分析，集群分析，多變量變異數分析，單因子變異數分析以及無母數等分析方法，詮釋變數間的差異與關聯性。本研究研究結果顯示：1.  不同之生活型態對運動休閒服的需求有顯著差異。2.  不同之人口統計變數對運動休閒服的需求，部分有顯著差異。3.  不同之生活型態對運動休閒服的購買行為有顯著差異。4.  不同之人口統計變數對運動休閒服的購買行為，部分有顯著差異。
By the consideration of the growing population of recreation sport to people in present era，the concept attending recreation sport was accepted and more popular by due to societal rapid change to be variable lifestyles. Furthermore，it is encouraged by public government to increase motive lifestyle by activities. Sports and leisure wear stressed its comfortable as well as relax feel is becoming normal.This study was based on questionnaires of 176 individuals in Taipei City. Statistical analysis used in the study includes descriptive static，factor analysis，cluster analysis，one way ANOVA，MANOVA，scheffe，correlation analysis, and nonparametric method. The following conclusions were obtained after analysis and discussion.1.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in the functional request of sports and leisure wear.2.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in the private impression of sports and leisure wear.3.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in the fashionable request of sports and leisure wear.4.  Sex groups showed difference in the private impression of sports and leisure wear5.  Age groups showed difference in the private impression of sports and leisure wear6.  Position groups showed difference in the private impression of sports and leisure wear.7.  Age groups showed difference in the fashionable request of sports and leisure wear.8.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in an acknowledgement of buying shops convenience. In traffic.9.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in buying frequency of sports and leisure wear.10.  Lifestyle groups showed difference in an acknowledgement of buying shops convenience. in traffic.11.  Age groups showed difference buying frequency of sports and leisure wear.12.  Position groups showed difference in the fashionable request of sports and leisure wear.
