運用赫序函數之通行碼身份認證設計的分析與改進
Cryptanalysis and Improvement of Remote User Authentication Schemes Using Hash Functions
身份認證、赫序函數、通行碼、可回復性、智慧卡
遠端使用者身份認證是資訊安全中最重要的議題之一，而通行碼身份認證方法則是目前最普遍被採用的遠端使用者身份認證方法。在早期的遠端使用者通行碼身份認證方法中，由於使用者與遠端伺服器之間所傳輸的通行碼為固定值，故攻擊者可藉由網路竊聽而取得使用者的通行碼以假冒該合法使用者，故此類早期的靜態通行碼遠端使用者身份認證技術已不能滿足今日的安全需求；而現今的遠端使用者通行碼身份認證方法則多藉由密碼技術以使遠端伺服器與使用者之間所傳輸的通行碼為不固定值以避免攻擊者直接藉由竊聽網路取得通行碼。現今的遠端使用者動態通行碼身份認證方法依其所使用的技術可大略分為兩類：(1) 以公開金鑰密碼技術為基礎之身份認證方法；(2) 以赫序函數為基礎之身份認證方法。以公開金鑰密碼技術為基礎之身份認證方法通常需要高複雜度的運算，相對地，以赫序函數為基礎之身份認證方法通常僅需要低複雜度的簡單運算，因此有實作較容易、系統建置費用較低等優點，而本論文的研究重點即為以赫序函數技術為基礎的身份認證方法。首先我們分析三套最近被提出的伺服器需儲存通行碼驗證資訊設計，包括：Lin與 Chang的設計、Yoon、Ryu與Yoo的設計與Lee與Chen 的設計。接著，我們分析兩套伺服器免儲存通行碼驗證資訊設計，包括：Yoon、Ryu與Yoo的設計與Liao、Lee與Hwang 的設計。之後，我們提出一個較安全且實用性較高的伺服器需儲存通行碼驗證資訊之通行碼身份認證設計，此改進設計能夠抵擋通行碼驗證資訊遭竊後之攻擊、阻斷服務攻擊以及內部者攻擊，並且可提供向前保密之能力與理想的可回復性，同時亦提供通行碼變更機制且解決Lin與Chang的設計與Lee與Chen 的設計需要重設通行碼的問題。另外，我們亦提出一個較安全且實用性較高的伺服器免儲存通行碼驗證資訊之通行碼身份認證設計，此改進設計能夠抵擋已知的攻擊並具備理想的可回復性。由於現有的伺服器免儲存通行碼驗證資訊之通行碼身份認證設計皆缺乏一個適當的使用者移除機制，然而此機制在實際應用環境卻是不可缺少的，故我們將使用者移除機制加入於伺服器免儲存通行碼驗證資訊之通行碼身份認證改進設計中。最後，我們將兩個改進的通行碼身份認證設計和現有類似的通行碼身份認證設計在安全性及實用性上作比較以說明具體改進處。
Nowadays, password authentication is still one of the most widely used au-thentication mechanisms to authenticate users logining any kind of remote servers. Conventional static password authentication schemes cannot resist direct wiretap-ping attacks, and therefore are unsuitable for open network environments. To meet today’s security requirements, many one-time (or dynamic) password authentication schemes have been proposed. In terms of the usage of techniques, existing one-time password authentication schemes can be categorized into two types (1) public key technique based; and (2) hash-based. Public key technique based schemes require modular exponential operation, it will lead heavy computational load to application systems. In contrast, hash-based schemes have the advantages of lighter computa-tional overhead, simpler designs, and easier implementations. Therefore, hash-based schemes are especially suitable for some constrained environments. In this thesis, we focus on the hash-based password authentication schemes. First, we analyze the security strength and practicability of several newer verifier-based password authen-tication schemes, including Lin-Chang’s scheme, Yoon-Ryu-Yoo’s verifier-based scheme, and Lee-Chen’s scheme. Next, we analyze the security strength and practi-cability of several newer verifier-free password authentication schemes, including Yoon-Ryu-Yoo’s verifier-free scheme and Liao-Lee-Hwang’s scheme. And then, we propose an improved verifier-based scheme with better resistance to the sto-len-verifier attack, the denial-of-service attack, and the insider attack. In particular, the improved verifier-based scheme can achieve forward secrecy and is easily repa-rable. And, the operation of password change is specified in the improved veri-fier-based scheme. Furthermore, we also solve the password resetting problem of Lin-Chang’s scheme and Lee-Chen’s scheme. On the other hand, we describe an improved verifier-free password authentication scheme with better resistance to well-known attacks and is easily reparable. As none of existing verifier-free remote user password authentication schemes explicitly specifies the user eviction mecha-nism which should be provided for use in real environments, the user eviction mechanism is additionally specified in the improved verifier-free scheme. Finally, we compare the two improved schemes with several similar schemes with respect to security and practicability, respectively.
