運用主成份分析法計算台灣利率市場的風險值之實證研究
The Empirical Study of Taiwan’s Interest Market’s VaR Using Principle Components Analysis
主成份分析、利率資產投資組合、風險值、移動視窗、蒙地卡羅
摘要論文題目：運用主成份分析法計算台灣利率市場的風險值之實證研究系所名稱：天主教輔仁大學 金融研究所碩士在職專班研究生：吳雲飛指導教授：李泰明 博士    本文以2002/5/22至2006/4/14止之台灣利率市場成交的Yield to Maturity 週資料為樣本，主要是利用主成份分析法捕捉此期間台灣YTM curve的變動與計算利率資產投資組合的風險值(VaR)。本文將研究發現歸納如下：1.以主成份分析法分析利率變動變數，發現前三個主成份已解釋總變異的82.9%。其中第一主成份代表平移，由長期利率主導；第二主成份代表傾斜，由短期利率主導；第三主成份類似國外的第四主成份。2.擷取了前兩個主成份變數來模擬個別利率變動，在99%的信賴水準下，模擬情境範圍大致能涵蓋YTM曲線的個別利率變動。並模擬利率之利差變動，在99％的信心水準所模擬出之利率變動情境，能涵蓋到大部分利差的變動。3.以隨機的1,000個虛擬利率投資組合以及以國泰債券基金投資組合為例，發現使用YTM curve之主成份分析所擷取的前兩個主成份為基礎，以移動視窗所估計的風險值有高估實際風險值的現象。原因在於維度所形成之聯立推論問題。4.於預期利率波動程度加大，或長短期利率方向操作相反時，則經營者可使用較保守的主成份分析法來估計風險值。作者以為，雖然主成份分析法估計之風險值與實際風險值有差距，惟這種差距是經常性存在，以實用而言，這樣的差距是可以被接受的。    本論文主要的貢獻在於使用移動視窗來處理隨著時間經過時，每週增加的新資料，因此仍可應用於未來利率於上升波段或下降波段；並運用蒙地卡羅法結合主成份分析法估算出實際的失敗率，使主成份法估計的利率風險模型更可應用。    關鍵字：主成份分析，利率資產投資組合，風險值，移動視窗，蒙地卡羅。
AbstractTitle of Thesis The Empirical Study of Taiwan’s Interest Market’s VaR Using Principle Components AnalysisName of Institute Graduate Institute of Finance, Fu Jen Catholic UniversityDegree Conferred MasterName of Student Wu Yun-feiAdvisor Dr. Lee Tai-mingThe sample data of this thesis contains Taiwan YTM weekly interest rate market from 2002/5/22 to 2006/4/14, and Principle Component Analysis (PCA, hereunder) is used to produce YTM curve scenarios’ movements and calculate the VaR of the portfolios. The following below are the most important gist from the thesis.1. Combining the first three principle component factors’ variance, 82.9% of the total variance is explained for the interest rate movements. Long-term interest rate dominates the first “Shift” factor; the second “Slope” factor is led by short-term interest rate; the third factor, curvature, is kind of the fourth factor in USA or Swiss.2. First two factors are extracted to simulate the movements of individual interest rate, at the alpha = 1%, the scenarios are rich enough to capture individual YTM curve movements and the spreads between different terms of YTM.3. Randomly selected 1,000 hypothetical portfolios and realistic Cathay Bond Fund are to derive the first two factors for estimating the VaR. The PCA method tends to overstates the risk because the problems of joint inference and dimensionality.4. Managers can use PCA method to estimate future VaR when the volatility of short-term and long-term interest rates are expected higher or when they put opposite positions between short-term and long-term interest rates of the portfolios. The problem of VaR overstatement exists frequently, and in practice, such difference is acceptable.  The contributions of the thesis are using moving windows to deal with the new data incurring every week, and hence, it could be applied to the interest rate up or down situations; and combining the Principle Component Analysis with Monte Carlo simulation to obtain the real error rate so that the VaR model of PCA method is more practical.Key Words Principle Component Analysis, YTM, VaR, Moving Window,Monte Carlo Simulation.
