運用貝氏網路與關聯法則於產品推薦之研究
Using Bayesian Network and Association Rule for Product Rcommendation
關聯法則分析、貝氏網路、推薦系統
近年來，越來越多的企業利用網站來從事各類商品或服務之行銷工作，讓顧客可以透過網際網路，在任何時間及地點進行線上購物或資料搜尋。由於顧客在網路上受到廣告刺激後可以立即進行購買，因此較容易發生衝動型的購買行為。所以，若是能在顧客光臨網站的同時主動推薦顧客所喜好的產品，ㄧ來可以減少顧客從大量商品資料中搜尋所需商品的困擾，二來企業也可增加產品銷售的機會。因此，近幾年運用在電子商務網站上的推薦系統相當熱門。本研究試圖利用Model-Based方法的貝氏網路技術建構一個產品推薦系統。但要從現存的資料學習出"最佳化"的貝氏網路結構，已經被證明是一個NP-Hard 的問題。因此，本研究利用關聯法則來協助建構貝氏網路結構。本研究期望能藉由兩者技術的結合應用來改善只使用單一技術的缺點。尤其在貝氏網路的部份，除了利用貝氏事後推論來彌補關聯法則之推薦缺憾之外，也希望透過貝氏網路視覺化的呈現方式，讓企業可以輕易的觀察出顧客對各種產品間的購買狀況。本研究在推薦階段則結合個人和全體的推論結果，期望在建議顧客本身喜好的關聯產品之外，也可透過全體的喜好來產生意外的潛在推薦。
More and more corporations are marketing various kinds of products or services through websites in recent years. Their customers can search for information or shop at any time and places through Internet. Due to the immediate purchasing motivation of customers in Internet after being attracted to web advertising, the impulsive purchasing behavior will happen more easily. Hence, if we can actively recommend the products that customers like as they visit our website, companies can not only reduce the customers' efforts when searching for much product information but also raise the sales opportunities of products. Therefore, the recommendation system in e-commerce has become one of the most successful application systems in recent years. In this research, we attempted to utilize Bayesian Network to form a product recommendation system. But, modeling optimal structure of Bayesian Network from existing data is shown to be an NP-Hard problem. For this reason, this research tried to utilize association rules to help establish the structure of Bayesian Network. We expect to improve the weakness of using a single technique by combining two techniques. Especially in the part of Bayesian Network, besides using posterior inference to solve the weakness of association rules, we hope that the corporations can easily observe the purchasing behavior of customers with the visualization mechanism of Bayesian Network. In this research, we combined the individual and the group inferences in the phase of recommendation. We expect the system can not only recommend the related products of the individual customer but also produce unexpected potential recommendation through the favor of the whole customers.
