適用於多伺服器架構之通行碼身份認證協定
password quthentication schemes for multi-server architecture
身份認證、赫序函數、多伺服器、通行碼、可回復性
使用者身份認證是資訊安全中最重要的議題之一，而通行碼身份認證方法則一直是最普遍被採用的遠端使用者身份認證方法。然而，一般的通行碼身份認證協定多屬單一伺服器架構，當應用於有多台遠端伺服器的環境時則需要向各遠端伺服器個別註冊，故可能使得使用者需要記憶多組不同的識別碼與通行碼，特別當這些通行碼中有多個為系統隨機產生時，將更加重使用者的記憶負擔，因此，過去已有不少學者陸續提出適用於多伺服器架構之通行碼身份認證協定以有效解決此類問題，例如：以公開金鑰密碼技術為基礎之TWL 協定與以赫序函數技術為基礎之 Wu 協定，但均被發現有其安全弱點與實用性不佳的缺點。在本論文中，我們分析四個目前較具代表性的適用於多伺服器架構之通行碼身份認證協定— CJT 協定、HS 協定、Wang 協定與 CL 協定之安全性與實用性，我們發現 CJT 協定無法抵擋猜測攻擊與內部者攻擊且其可回復性較弱，HS 協定對於向前保密與內部者攻擊等安全性考量並不理想且可回復性較弱，Wang 協定對於偽造攻擊、猜測攻擊與內部者攻擊的防禦力並不理想，CL 協定之向前保密能力與對於內部者攻擊的防禦力並不理想且其可回復性亦較弱。在分析代表性協定常遭遇之攻擊的原因、影響與對策後，我們亦設計出一套改進的適用於多伺服器架構之通行碼身份認證協定，此改進的協定不但具有運算簡單、不需要儲存驗證資訊、使用者可自行選擇通行碼等優點，並能抵擋猜測攻擊、重送攻擊、阻斷服務攻擊、偽造攻擊、內部者攻擊，此外，有別於多數現有的此類協定可回復性較弱與缺乏通行碼變更機制，我們的改進協定可提供較強的可回復性並提供通行碼變更機制。
Password authentication is recognized as one of the most cost-effective au-thentication mechanisms to authenticate users logining remote servers. Since the scale of the networks becomes larger and larger, the password authentication schemes which only support the single-server architecture will not suffice for user’ need. If there are multiple servers to access, the user has to register with each server individually and possibly should remember different identifiers and passwords for accessing different servers. Therefore, many password authentication schemes for multi-server architecture have been proposed, some based on cryptosystems, e.g., the TWL scheme, and some based on hash functions, e.g., Wu’s scheme, the CL scheme, the CJT scheme, the HS scheme, and Wang’s scheme. In general, the password authentication schemes for multi-server architecture based on cryptosys-tems will lead heavy computational load to their application systems. On the other hand, most existing hash based password authentication schemes for multi-server architecture have the advantages of lighter computational overhead, simpler designs, and easier implementations. In this thesis, we study the causes, effects, and coun-termeasures of the attacks often mounted on hash based password authentication schemes for multi-server architecture. First, we analyze the security strength of sev-eral newer hash based password authentication schemes for multi-server architecture, including the CL scheme, the CJT scheme, the HS scheme, and Wang’s scheme. Next, we propose an improved password authentication scheme for multi-server ar-chitecture with better resistance to the insider attack, the replay attack, the de-nial-of-service attack, the forgery attack, and the guessing attack. In particular, the improved scheme is easily reparable. Although the operation of password change is one of the fundamental services that a password authentication scheme should pro-vide to the user, it was not explicitly described in most similar schemes. In the im-proved scheme, the operation of password change is additionally specified.
