遺傳程式規劃為基的時間序列模型在金融市場之應用
A Model of the Time Series based on Genetic Programming – An Application on Financial Markets
時間序列、自我迴歸移動平均模型、遺傳程式規劃法
時間序列模型，其主要的特色在於希望發掘時間序列變數現在與過去的關係，Box與Jenkins（1976）提出自我迴歸移動平均模型（Autoregressive Moving Average Model, ARMA），使用自變項與殘差項落後期數持續推估時間序列模型。本研究應用遺傳程式規劃（Genetic Programming,GP），建構一個以遺傳程式規劃法為主，ARMA模型為輔的整合型時間序列自我迴歸建構模型，稱為ARMA_GP模型。九個研究對象涵蓋綜合股價指數類、國際匯率類與主要個別股價類之時間序列資料，最後依照績效評定準則交互評比兩模型之成效，分析遺傳程式規劃法之最適解結構、演化現象及兩模型之準確性，共執行176次實驗。本研究之實驗結果與結論如下：（1）ARMA_GP模型更能準確地捕捉財務時間序列之自我迴歸關係，在訓練期間ARMA_GP模型以高達76.81%之平均績效勝率勝過ARMA模型，在預測期間亦能以66.67%之平均績效勝率勝過ARMA模型，且所有ARMA_GP模型實驗之MAPE均小於10%為高準確度模型。（2）研究對象涵蓋三種類型，其具多樣性與差異性。ARMA_GP模型可使用原始序列資料，並不需驗證資料性質。在當研究對象符合非定態序列或定態序列時，仍可維持高準確性與高績效比率。（3）因ARMA_GP模型之最適解結構具多元性，可從節點結構與演化過程解釋各式樣的時間序列自我迴歸關係，例如序列與落後一期之自變項和殘差項相關性最高。適應函數為MAPE之實驗，在預測期間之精確度最高，本研究亦建議評估指標可選用MAPE與MSPE。
The main characteristic of time series model is to discover the relationships between the past and the present in financial time series. Box and Jenkins（1976） proposed Autoregressive Moving Average Model（ARMA） model using lags of independent variables and error terms to estimate the time series model. This research applies Genetic Programming（GP）to construct an integrated time series model named ARMA_GP model. The major part of the model is GP and the minor part is ARMA. The nine cases of study include stock exchange capitalization weighted stock index, exchange rate and individual stock index. Finally, the research evaluates the two models’ effect and accuracy according to five performance measurements and analyzes the optimal solutions, the evolution of GP. The total times of experiments are 176. We can get the following results（1）ARMA_GP model can fit more precisely for the auto-regressive relationships of financial data. The average performance of ARMA_GP model is obviously better than ARMA model during the training period and the forecast period, and all MAPE of ARMA_GP model experiments are smaller than 10% meaning high accuracy models.（2）The objects of study include three types which are diverse and different. We can use the primary data in ARMA_GP model, and don’t have to test the property of the data. When the data is stationary or non-stationary, ARMA_GP model still maintains high accuracy and high performance.（3）Because the optimal structure of ARMA_GP model has diversity, we can explain various kinds of auto-regressive relationships of time series from node structure and evolution processes. For instance, the relation between the the lag1 independent variables and error terms of the series and is the highest. And the MAPE, the fitness function of the experiments, has the highest accuracy during the forecast period. The research also suggests that we can choose MAPE and MSPE to be the performance indices.
