遺傳演算法在個人通訊系統移動區域更新策略之研究
A Study of Mobility Management for Personal Communication System Bsed on Generic Algorithm
移動管理、個人行動通信系統、遺傳演算法
行動通信之移動管理首重位置更新(Location Update)和傳呼(Paging)兩大範疇，其使得無線網路能順利地將手機用戶的所在位置定位並且建立無線連結。位置更新，又稱區域註冊，是無線網路用以更新資料庫中手機用戶目前位置的方法。傳呼則是無線網路系統尋找某地區中某特定手機用戶的過程。移動管理的策略，是思考如何將眾多基地台配置成單一或眾多的的區域，進而節省了邊界移動及傳呼的流量及資源消耗。本研究應用遺傳演算法於位置註冊區之邊界規劃，除於適應函數納入邊界交遞成本與呼叫成本的交互影響外，更納入無線信號等因素一併考量。本研究嘗試以不同的編碼方法以測試實驗之穩定度與收斂效率。研究發現，若僅考量手機邊界交遞之訊務成本，最佳解將由邊界導向編碼較為優異。另一方面，若考量細胞無線品質與資源餘裕度等因素，細胞導向之編碼較能更勝一籌。實驗資料乃套用北高雄市各細胞相關資訊進行演化，結果發現隨著適應函數考量面向越廣的納入細胞資源與訊號因素，GA所規劃之位置註冊區數量將增加且個別區域範圍將縮小。最後經反覆實驗證明本研究模組於解決邊界交遞成本與呼叫成本的兩難問題具顯著效果。此外，對於區域基地台離敵性的監控機制，俾使註冊區內基地台地理群聚度高，以為系統業者節省更多傳輸費用。
Mobility management for Mobile communication is divided in to basic domain, Location Update and Paging procedure. These facility help system locate where mobile is roaming in and page subscribers for a further connection via air interface. Location Update means to update location information with HLR. Paging process is the procedure to require for mobile response. Usually, entire base stations are classified into several Location Areas which are the basic unit for paging coverage. All the base station belong the same location area will execute paging command to search one specific subscribers who roams within the Location Area.An MS must update its location information whenever it crosses the boundary of an LA. As the size of the LA increases, the uncertainty of the location of an MS rises. A Paging packet destined for a mobile which is located in a specific LA is broadcast by all the Base Stations that belong to this LA. As a result, the selection of a larger LA leads to an increase in the traffic intensity of broadcasted Paging messages. In turn, the traffic intensity of LU messages is decreased.It’s a trade-off issue between cost of paging messages and the intensity of LU messages, and the study is to deliberate upon how to organize entire base stations into a set of proper LAs. The research applied Generic Algorithm into LA planning for Personal Communication System and brought cost about LU message and paging message into fitness function. Further more, in order to maintain the Quality of Service during each call connection on executing location update, we involve more radio interface factors into fitness evaluation. The research attempt to utilize two kinds of code presentation for GA chromosome, Border-Orientation is proper for saving LU cost and Cell-Orientation is better for frequency intensity and RF quality for cell factor.The consequence of the research is quite stable and efficiently provide intelligent resolution for mobility management. We hope that the module will improve the PCS operator to plan more cost-effective strategy about Location Area designation. Additionally, facility for centralization about base station also utilized in the module also help the operator to save more physical circuits on transmission cost.
