遺傳演算法在建構客服中心人力排班之研究
A Study of Call Center Scheduling Based on Generic Algorithm
遺傳演算法、多目標遺傳演算法、客服中心、人力排班
客服中心產業在近年快速發展，而根據美國普度大學研究報告指出人力成本佔客服中心總成本超過60%，企業如何妥善運用客服中心人力在關鍵時刻滿足客戶關係維繫的需求並降低公司成本，成為目前各客服中心關注的焦點。本研究利用多目標遺傳演算法建模技術，將客服中心人員排班考慮之三個主要目標：（1）客服人員的滿意度；（2）顧客的滿意度；（3）公司管理人員的滿意度，轉為求解的目標函數；加上客服中心之公司政策、法令規章等成為排班限制式，以此找出最佳解的客服人員班表。綜合本研究的結論可歸納以下幾點：1.  本研究同時考量三個目標－公司管理面、客戶需求面、員工滿意度，GA能順利找出符合多目標決策的班表。而且在銀行客服中心每週7 x 24小時、365天不間斷的工作環境下，GA可以在短時間內順利的排出最佳解之班表。2.  經由實驗之權重調整分析，可發現三個多目標若依企業徧好，只要求單目標決策，單純的只滿足一個目標，則以公司管理α3（休假日公平性）最容易達到，收斂的時間較快，其次為客戶的滿意度α2（電話量的預測人力需求），最後為員工自我排班的滿意度α1。3.  經由實驗之休假日公平性分析，可發現在公司管理面上，本研究利用GA所排出之班表，其休假日接近一致，也較符合公司管理面要求之休假日公平性。
The industry of customer service centre develops fast in recent years, and point out according to the research paper of American Purdue University that the manpower cost accounts for the total cost of customer service centre to exceed 60%, how enterprises use the manpower of customer service centre to be satisfied with the demand that customer's relation maintains and reduce company's cost at the crucial moment properly, become the focus paid close attention to in every customer service centre at present.Whether research this utilize multi-objective generic algorithm perform algorithm modeling technology, arrange an order according to shift and grade 3 main goal that consider personnel, in the center of customer service. (1) Customer service agent's satisfaction; (2) The customer's satisfaction; (3) The satisfaction of the administrative staff of the company, transfer to the goal function in order to be solved; In addition, the limiting type that the company policy of the customer service centre, decree rule, etc. become and arrange an order according to shift, find out best shit, personnel of customer service, that solve. Conclusion of synthesizing this research as below1.  Consider three goals at the same time in this research - The chain of command of company, customer's demand, staff's satisfaction, GA can find out the shit which accord with multi-objective decision smoothly. And under the customer service centre 7 x 24 hours working environment, 365 days of every week of the bank, GA can be expressed in the smooth best shift that solves of discharge within short time.2.  Adjust and analysis, can find if more than three goals depend on enterprises via the weight of the experiment? If only require that the single goal makes policy, a simple a satisfied goal, it is easiest to reach to manage (fairness in holiday) with the company, the time to disappear is very fast, secondly it is the customer's satisfaction   (the prediction manpower demand for telephone calls), satisfaction  arranging an ordering according to class and grade for the staff oneself finally.3.  The fairness analysis, can find on the chain of command of company on holiday via the experiment, this research utilizes the shift that GA discharges, is close to unanimity its holiday, relatively accord with the holiday fairness of the request of chain of command of company too.
