遺傳程式規劃為基礎的信用貸款逾期流入率預測之研究
A Study of the Consumer Loan Delinquent Roll-in Rate Prediction based on Genetic Programming
消費金融、逾期戶、逾期流入率、遺傳程式規劃
在追求消費金融業務成長的口號下，許多銀行的逾期放款也同時隨著成長。在過去的研究中，大多是針對逾期戶的單一解釋變數進行統計分析，將結論歸納為信用評等之依據。對於逾期戶流入率的預測模型，迄今尚未有相關的文獻探討。因此本研究試圖應用人工智慧中，具有解決複雜系統能力之遺傳程式規劃(Genetic Programming, GP)建立預測模型。期望能解決信用貸款逾期流入率預測問題，以提昇催收績效及擬定催收策略之用。本研究主要針對消費性信用貸款逾期戶，建立逾期流入率的預測模型。當正常繳款客戶，落入M1(逾期30天以內)的逾期戶時，經由模型預測新逾期案件流入M2(逾期31天以上)的逾期流入率與區隔正確率。本研究結果顯示，在整體逾期戶流入率的預測方面，得到極好的效果。流入率預測值與實際值誤差皆在2%以內，而個別逾期戶由M1流入M2的預測，正確率也維持在73%至77%左右。隨意選擇解釋變數時，變數越多預測結果表現越好。當取解釋變數出現次數最多的8個變數進行演化，發現可以得到兼顧演化時間較短及流入率與正確率更好的最佳決策法則。最後，期望以GP應用於逾期戶流入率之決策法則的創新研究，能夠讓後續研究者對於演化式計算應用在催收管理方面有所啟發。實務上，可做為銀行風險管理、決策制定及損失率預測之參考。
Under pursue the slogan that consumer banking grows up, the delinquent of a lot of banks, at the same time with grow up too. In the past, most research focus on statistical analysis on explanation parameters of the delinquent or credit evaluation model. The delinquent prediction model of roll-in rate of family has not been investigated.  This research attempts to use Genetic Programming (GP), a hereditary procedure which solves complicated system ability, to set up the predicting model. Expect to be able to solve the delinquent roll-in rate of the consumer loan and predict the problem, in order to promote and press for the performance and draft that presses for the using of the tactics.This research is to the consuming delinquent of consumer loan mainly, set up the prediction model of the delinquent roll-in rate. Work as the normal payment customer, when falling into overdue cluster of M1 (within the overdue 30 days), predict via model new overdue case flow into delinquent who flow into of M2 (overdue over 31 days) separate correct rate with district. This study uses 31 variables to predict M1 accounts, which was overdue within 30 days, become M2 accounts, which was overdue over 30 days. From the statistics, the probability for M2 accounts pay on time is less than 3%.GP provides an excellent prediction on the whole delinquent roll-in rates. The differences between roll-in rate predicted values and actual values are less than 2%. For predicting customers flowed from M1 to M2, the accuracy rate maintains about 73% to 77%. We also found four important variables to predict customers flow from M1 to M2 overdue days, commitment payment rate, effective response rate of telephone debit collection, overdue number. When selecting variables randomly, the more variables selected, the better the result. However, when selecting eight important variables, not only the evolving time is shorter but the result is better than selecting all 31 variables.The result of this study will help management to focus on accounts which is most likely become M2 account.  This will effectively help banks out of financial trouble cause by card debts. Future studies in this area are also needed to explore ways to prevent customers become M2 account which have been identified by the model.
