都會區連鎖便利商店消費者行為之研究
The Study of Consumer Behavior in Metropolis Convenience Chain Stores
連鎖便利商店、消費者行為、選店準則
本研究旨在了解都會區連鎖便利商店的消費行為，從消費者行為模式觀點，瞭解連鎖便利商店之消費現況，並希望藉由人口統計變項及生活型態變項，檢視連鎖便利商店是否存在不同消費群組。並進一步研究不同消費群組在整體消費決策上是否存在差異。本研究以三大都會區台北縣市、台中縣市及高雄縣市之連鎖便利商店的消費者為研究母體，以問卷為測量工具，採取便利抽樣的方式，透過網路問卷及一般紙本問卷二種方式共計取得1054份有效問卷。在分析方法上，以次數分配及百分比來描述樣本狀況，並運用因素分析萃取出八個因素構面，以兩階段集群分析，將市場區分為四個集群；採用卡方檢定人口統計變數及消費現況在四集群的差異；利用ANOVA 檢定及Scheffe檢定各集群在選店準則變項間的差異。以下將研究結果及建議歸納如下：一、研究結果顯示連鎖便利商店主要的消費客源為21-30歲的年輕人，以女性居多，教育程度以大學畢業居多，職業以學生佔多數，家庭狀況以未婚為主，平均月收入則以20,000元以下佔多數。每週大約惠顧連鎖便利商店2-3次為多數；消費時間多集中在下午5點~晚上8點；平均每次消費金額為51-100元為主；最常購買的產品依序是飲料類、餅乾類、繳費、鮮食類、報紙；獲得訊息的主要來源是連鎖便利商店本身。二、四集群在人口統計、生活型態、選店準則及消費現況上，皆有顯著或部分顯著差異。三、建議連鎖便利商店業者可加強改善消費者最重視的選店準則屬性，以提高消費者的惠顧率；並針對四集群的特徵採取有效的行銷策略。
The purpose of this study is mainly to understand consumer behavior in metropolis convenience chain stores. Demography and lifestyle are independent variables. Dependent variables are consumer behavior and store selection. This study focuses on exploring relations between independent and dependent variables.  Finally, marketing strategies are initiated to tailors the differences among segments.This research is aimed at the consumers living in Taipei, Taichung and Kaohsiung.  Questionnaires are used to investigate the data pertinent to consumers’ demographics, lifestyle, consuming behavior and store selection. Totally, 1054 valid questionnaires are collected.  Hypotheses are analyzed via the statistical techniques including：ANOVA, scheffe test, chi-square test, cluster analysis and factor analysis.There are two major findings in this study：1. Consumer characteristics of convenience chain stores are female, unmarried, between 21 to 30 years old, college graduated and under ＄20,000 income, shopping average 2-3 times a week, every time expenses is $51-100, the most purchased products are beverages, cracker, pay out, fresh food and newspaper. There are some significant differences in demographics, consumer behaviors, lifestyle and store selection.2. Due to the findings, it is suggested that convenience chain stores improve their attributes which consumers care most in order to enhance the numbers of consuming.  Effective marketing strategies should be adopted according to the attributes of four segments.
