醫院門診病患就診滿意度研究---以某教學醫院為例
Investigation of Outpatient Satisfaction on Medical Service Quality----A Case Study of a Teaching Hospital Clinic
健康促進生活型態、PZB服務品質、集群分析、對應分析

本研究旨在對某教學醫院門診病患就診之滿意度進行探析，以方便抽樣抽取850位門診病患進行問卷調查，以PZB服務品質模式以及健康促進生活型態兩構面，進行因素與集群分析，並與人口變項做交叉及對應分析。研究顯示，門診病患的性別以女性居多，年齡多集中於21-40歲，看診科別以內科為主；病患選擇至該院看診的原因，以交通便利為最主要考量，其次是經由親友推薦；看診時間平均為112.07分鐘，與整體滿意度呈負相關，表示看診花費的時間越久，病患對整體滿意度越低；看診病患認為服務品質中最需要改善的項目是等候時間，其次是醫療環境及設備，第三是醫療過程。以集群的觀點來看服務品質的改善，滿意硬體環境群傾向於將醫療過程、服務結果及工作人員態度列為最需改善的項目；滿意時間群則較傾向於醫院環境及設備；滿意醫療品質群則較傾向於等待時間的改善。另外，研究顯示病患在健康促進生活型態構面與性別及居住地無關，但與年齡、婚姻狀況、教育程度、職業與PZB服務品質感受構面有顯著關聯。健康生活型態構面經由對應分析的結果顯示各個集群的特徵：注重身體健康群的年齡介於51-70歲、已婚者、教育程度高中職、無職業者；注重成就與關係群的年齡介於1-40歲、未婚者、高中職者、職業商、服務業、工、學生者；注重身心平衡群的年齡介於41-50歲、學歷專科以上者，軍公教、自由業者。另在服務品質實際感受中也顯示出注重成就與關係群者，對硬體環境較滿意；注重身心平衡群者較滿意醫療品質；注重身體健康群者，則對等候時間感到滿意。
This research is aimed to explore the outpatient’s satisfaction on medical service quality in a teaching hospital when they seeking medical advice and service. We apply the convenience sampling to complete 850 effective questionnaires. We adopt two dimensions of the PZB service quality mode and health-promoting lifestyle to conduct the factor and cluster analysis, together with cross and correspondence analysis on demographic variables. The research shows that most outpatients are females mainly aging from 20 to 40 and seeking service from internal medicine departments.  The reason for outpatients to attend hospital medical service is mainly based on the consideration of traffic convenience. The oral recommendation from relatives and friends is the second largest reason. The average medical visit time is 112.07 minutes negatively correlated to the overall satisfaction. It means the more time the patients spend for medical service, the lower satisfaction the patients feel about. The duration of waiting for medical service is the most urgent part required for improvement. The medical environment and equipment, and medical process are in the second and third places.In view of clustering for the improvement on service quality, the cluster members who are satisfied with the hardware environment tend to list the medical process, service results and service givers’ attitude as the most urgent items required for improvement the most. The cluster members satisfied with waiting duration tend to list the hospital environment and equipment as the ones required for improvement. The cluster members satisfied with medical service quality tend to list the waiting duration as the one required for improvement.In addition, our research shows the health-promoting dimensions of patients show no correlation to genders and dwelling locations. However, it is highly correlated to some dimensions such as ages, marital status, education levels, occupations and the feeling about PZB service quality. The results for the dimension of health-promoting lifestyle after correspondence analysis can display the features of various clusters. People who emphasize health age from 51 to 70 and they are married, senior high school degree and jobless. People who emphasize achievement and interpersonal relation age from 1 to 40 and they are unmarried, senior high school degree and the job takers in service, industrial and commercial occupations, or students.  People who emphasize mental and physical balance age from 41 to 45 and they are college degree holders or above with occupations military, public agencies and professional experts.  On the other hand, from the aspect of real feeling of patients about service quality also shows that people who emphasize achievement and intepersonal relation show more satisfaction with hardware environment.  People who emphasize mental and physical balance show higher satisfaction to medical service quality.  People who emphasize health show higher satisfaction to waiting duration.
