金融業電子帳單系統導入與成效關係之研究
The Study on the Relationship between EBPP Implementation and Benefit in Financial Industry
電子帳單、金融業、資訊系統績效

我國自民國七十九年開始推行金融自由化，台灣地區的金融版圖急速地進入了開放競爭的時代。各家銀行均積極改善其服務品質，應用創新的資訊科技，電子帳單成為其中重要的一環。金融業如何應用電子帳單系統來提昇服務品質、降低成本為本研究動機。本研究的目的，是整理國內外有關電子帳單系統文獻，瞭解電子帳單系統使用現況。並對國內金融業電子帳單系統導入現況進行個案分析，瞭解電子帳單系統導入方式及其應用的程度。根據資料分析結果找出國內金融業之電子帳單系統導入相關狀況，及其影響是否達成預期效益之原因。並針對金融業電子帳單系統導入方式及功能採用現況加以有系統的整理，提出金融業規劃電子帳單系統之參考建議。本研究發現金融業導入電子帳單系統時，資訊系統專案導入方式對電子帳單系統成效之影響如下：(1)對電子帳單系統有較深入之了解且對廠商要求較嚴格，則電子帳單系統導入可能會加強帳單服務作業、加速解決客戶帳單問題並提昇客戶滿意度。(2)定期舉行專案會議、跨部門參與專案及系統維護方式，可能影響電子帳單系統導入成效之品質向度。本研究亦發現電子帳單系統功能應用程度對電子帳單系統成效之影響如下：(1)重度使用的電子帳單系統可能大量節省帳單印製及郵寄成本、降低客服中心因帳單查詢及補寄之進線量。(2)採用負載平衡架構使電子帳單系統能快速處理問題、提供即時的回應。(3)電子帳單系統採用加簽加密功能可能讓使用者相信系統能提供安全的服務、系統提供的服務是值得信任的。(4)電子帳單系統整合網路銀行及CRM系統，提供個人化理財規劃建議及重要訊息通知，並對客戶進行個人化的行銷，可能強化電子帳單系統效益、並提高既有相關系統投資報酬率。
Taiwan has introduced the economic liberalization since 1990. This rapidly leads the money market toward an open competitive time. Each bank acts positively to apply innovative information technology to strengthen their competitiveness, furthermore, they intend to efficiently reform the business operation. EBPP become the significant part in the process of using information technology in financial industry. The way for Financial industry to apply EBPP system to achieve the objective of better service quality and cost saving becomes an incentive of doing this research.The purpose of the research is to understand the current status of using EBPP system through organizing related documentation which are collected from domestic or overseas resources. In addition, the research also focus on analyzing individually the situation of  financial EBPP implementation cases in Taiwan so that we can understand the approach of implementing EBPP and the level of its application. Based on the result of analysis, the research describes the status of existing EBPP implementation in financial industry in Taiwan and indicates the reason why EBPP achieve the goal or not. We also come out a suggestion for financial industry to do EBPP planning by means of the systematic generalization of previous EBPP experiences and functions.The research shows that the EBPP performance will be impacted by the way of implementing information system project. The related results are as below： (1) The more understanding of EBPP and well vendor control will strengthen billing service, quickly resolve customers’ billing problem and raise customers’ satisfaction. (2) Regular project meeting, co-operate with other departments and the way of system maintenance will impact the performance of EBPP. The EBPP performance will also be impacted by how you apply EBPP’s different functions. The related results include：(1) The high use of EBPP will reduce the cost of billing prints and mailing fees and the amount of call center’s inbound calls. (2) Using load-balance architecture will quickly resolve problem and provide fast response. (3) Through using digital signature and encryption, customers will realize that the system is able to provide secure service. (4) While EBPP integrates with on-line banks and CRM, it will benefit on EBPP and also increase individual’s ROI ( Return on Investment).
