銀行分行單位營運與策略決策模式之研究-以台北國際商業銀行為例
A Study of an Operating and Strategic Decision Model of Bank Branch Units - An Example from International Bank of Taipei
營運模式、決策支援、分析層級程序法、資料包絡分析
國內現今銀行家數過多且規模普遍較小，如需達到區域性金融機構的規模，金融業的合併是提昇市佔率最快速的方法。在合併其他金融機構之後，增加的分行加上原本的分行，需要有效的區隔與定位每間分行的營運模式，來追求最低成本與最高獲利。本論文的主要目的係在探討「分行營運模式決策之研究」，藉由系統來分析各分行的特性，進而決策出適當的營運模式。    在分行資料、客戶資料及客戶交易資料轉入系統並透過資料倉儲(data warehouse)分析後，經由分析層級程序法(analytic hierarchy process, AHP)與資料包絡分析法(data envelopment analysis, DEA)等決策模式來分析出最佳的營運模式並調整該分行資源不足或資源過剩的情形，達到資源配置最佳化及分行效率最大化的目標。    在實證中，決策分行若選擇財富管理型的營運模式，勢必要減少投入項資源以增加效率值，但也可能因此降低分行的服務品質水準。而如果是選擇旗艦型分行或傳統型分行，因效率值已經最大化，分行可以在減少投入資源的情況下，而不影響服務的品質，並可將釋放的資源運用於其他分行，達到資源使用最佳化。
Presently, domestic banks are excessively in the numbers and commonly operating in small size. The way for one bank’s operations management to achieve regional status is through mergers, which, often is the fastest means to date. Financial institutions which completed mergers must identify and apply new operations mechanism for both existing branches and newly merger ones. It is necessary for each bank to minimize its cost and maximize its profits. This study focuses on operations patterns of bank branches, applies the systematic analysis to characteristics of each local branch and then derives suitable operational methods.    First, data, information and knowledge about each branch, customer, transactions, etc. are imported into data warehouse. Second, analytical methods such as AHP (analytic hierarchy process), DEA (data envelopment analysis), OLAP (on-line analytic processing) etc. are applied to data warehouse. This results the most efficient operations mechanism of each bank. It would, also, aid in configuring circumstances such as staff schedule in each branch, therefore, in line achieving efficient resource allocation and maximizing operations targets.    In empirical experiment, this study identifies that if one branch operates wealth management business patterns, then it should decrease the amount of resource investment to enhance its efficiency. This, however, potentially degrades service quality of local branch. On the other hand, if one operates flagships or traditional business patterns, then local branch can maintain service qualities, pump additional resources to other branches, and finally maximize resources utilization.
