銀行集中度與經營績效之研究—全球實證
Bank Concentration and Performance  Global Evidence
灣在亞洲國家當中，銀行集中度(Concentration)較低，政府認為銀行大不一定會好，但好ㄧ定要大，於是推動「二次金改」，欲藉由金融政策的執行，作為體制的指引、改變金融市場的結構以提高金融效率，故政府治理機制的存在性扮演重要的角色。有鑑於此，本文考量了國家治理機制、經濟自由度等制度面、以及銀行本身的特性，針對銀行集中度與銀行績效(Performance)，以全球120個國家為樣本範圍，研究期間為1998至2003年，進行實證研究。    本文首先使用國家治理機制、經濟自由度、銀行本身特性的變數，解釋銀行集中度；對於解釋銀行績效方面，以股東權益報酬率(ROE)、淨利息邊際收益(NIM)、風險調整後的股東權益報酬率(Risk-Adjusted ROE)為被解釋變數外，使用了資產之集中度、銀行本身特性、總體環境變數以及國家治理指標、經濟自由度和每人平均國民所得等環境的虛擬變數作解釋變數。在研究方法上，以Panel Data進行估計。    由本文實證結果得知：國家治理機制越健全、經濟體系越開放的國家，其銀行的集中度越低。在高所得的國家中，會減少國家治理機制對銀行集中度的影響。以集中度和績效的關聯來看，銀行之集中度對於前三或前五大銀行的績效表現，並沒有顯著的關係，反而對前三大或前五大以外的銀行有弱性的正相關，代表其他的銀行藉由成本的控管以及集中化管理，在競爭激烈的金融業中，尋獲利基以提高經營的績效；另外，實證也發現，高報酬率和低報酬率的銀行，其資產規模並沒有顯著的差異，因此本文證明出銀行大不一定好，而且好也不一定大。在銀行特性方面，銀行的放款呆帳準備率、營運成本比率、放款佔資產比率與銀行的股東權益報酬率呈現反向關係；淨值比率的增加對於銀行的股東權益報酬率是有正面的影響。
This thesis discusses bank concentration and the relationship between bank concentration and performance. Compared to other Asian countries, the bank concentration in Taiwan is lower. Because of this situation, the Taiwan Government claims that the presence of a great number of banks with relatively lower bank concentration leads to more serious competition. To solve the problem, the Taiwan Government has carried out a financial revolution.The improvement of bank concentration may create scale and scope economics. On the other hand, it may be costly, insofar as input cost, consolidation cost, agency cost may result, and even offset the advantages that it can bring. By virtue of this, we are interested in discussing the relationship between bank concentration and bank performance. At first, we add some systematic variables, such as country-level corporate governance, and economic freedom, to analyze the financial market structures all over the world. Besides, we use bank concentration and some bank characteristic variables (e.g., Loan Loss Reserve Ratio, Equity to Assets Ratio, Operational Cost Ratio, Loan to Assets Ratio, and Loan Growth Ratio) to explain bank profitability, which is reflected on some indices, such as, ROE, NIM, and Risk-Adjusted ROE.The samples contained about 120 countries around the world and the sample period is from 1998 to 2003. Because the samples are cross-section and time -series data, we use panel model to conduct this research.The results of regression analysis show that a negative correlation with country-level corporate governance (CCG) and bank concentration. It means that countries with sound country-level corporate governance may lower the bank concentration. Similarly, a negative correlation with economic freedom and bank concentration is found. The third finding is a positive correlation with bank concentration and return on equity (ROE) of all banks, which means that bank concentration indeed improves all banks’ ROE. However, there’s no evidence to argue that the three-bank or five-bank concentration will improve the ROE of three-bank or five-bank. This study shows that higher Loan Loss Reserve Ratio, Operational Cost Ratio, and Loan to Assets Ratio bring about detrimental effects on ROE of banks.
