集團企業評價與分析-經濟資源觀點的個案應用
A Case Study of Business Groups Valuation and Analysis A Resources Deployment Approach
集團企業、經濟資源觀點、杜邦方程式、財務驅動因子、財務預警指標
本研究將集團企業股東權益區分為控制、財務、影響及未來四大資源，類似資產組合報酬率的算法，集團最終的股東權益報酬率等於分配在各資源的股東權益之比重與該資源所得之股東權益報酬率的加權平均。集團企業面對詭譎多變的市場競爭下，旗下可能具有數個公司或數個事業，投資損益佔公司獲利比重越來越高，也令投資大眾難以捉摸。傳統多站式損益表將純益劃分為三類：營業利益、營業外淨收入及非常損益等三個盈餘組成要素，但集團企業與旗下轉投資事業關係緊密，甚至是資源共享，唇齒相依，若僅將轉投資收益視為營業外收入，似乎難以評斷該集團企業經營全貌。本研究以經濟資源觀點將樣本財務資料重新分類，並將股東權益報酬率（Return on Equity）拆解，除與杜邦方程式(DuPont formula)比較外，另試圖找出集團企業價值的財務驅動因子及財務預警指標，結果顯示經濟資源觀點方式拆解ROE方法較杜邦方程式更詳細，NIAT NWC、NIAT NLOA為明顯的財務預警指標，希望提供報表使用者另一種分析評價工具。
This thesis decomposes shareholders’ equity of business groups into four categories net operating assets, net financial assets, strategic investments and future resources. Similar to the computation of returns on portfolios, returns on equity equal the equity-proportion weighted average of returns on equity of the four resources categories. To be competitive, business groups may have invested in subsidiaries, associates, joint ventures and lines of business, as well as financial investments, hence investment profits can at times more important than operating profits, which without proper separation, may leave investors greatly surprised. Traditional income statement format consists of three parts operating profit, non-operating income and extraordinary gains or losses. The relationship between business groups and their affiliates is intimate; it is inadequate to analyze business group performance just by recognizing profits from these investments as non-operating income.This study reformats the sample business groups’ financial statements alone the line of economic resources deployment and compares the decomposed ROE against the DuPont Formula, with an aim to find out key financial drivers of group values as well as financial warning signals. Empirical results demonstrate that ROE decomposition based on the economic resources deployment view provides better insight into group performance than the DuPont Formula. Also, NIAT NWC and NIAT NLOA are important financial warning signals. Hence, the proposed decomposition method could be able to offer financial statement users another valuable analytical tool.
