雙薪家庭國小高年級學童知覺父母參與、共親職與家庭生活幸福感之相關研究
Parents’ involvement, coparenting and family life well-being for the fifth and sixth graders of dual-earner family.
雙薪家庭、父母參與、共親職、家庭生活幸福感
本研究旨在了解雙薪家庭國小高年級學童知覺父母參與、共親職與家庭生活幸福感之情形，並進一步探討父母參與、共親職對於家庭生活幸福感的解釋情形。本研究採用問卷調查的方式，以台北縣公立國民小學的五、六年級學童為研究對象，使用「父母參與量表」、「父母共親職量表」及「家庭生活幸福感量表」等測量工具，共計發出630份問卷，得有效問卷421份。研究資料經描述性統計、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、積差相關以及多元迴歸，其主要發現如下一、  國小高年級學童知覺父母在「親密互動」、「生活協助」、「溝通支持」三個層面的養育參與上都是常常參與的，而將父母參與頻率進行平均數比較，可發現母親三個層面的參與皆較父親為多。二、  國小高年級學童知覺父母彼此之間確實常存在著合作共親職，而較少抵制共親職。此外，國小高年級學童所知覺到的家庭生活幸福感相當高。三、由差異考驗可發現，學童性別不同，父母在參與上有顯著差異，而在共親職、家庭生活幸福感方面，則並未因為學童性別而呈現顯著差異。此外，學童社經背景不同，在父母參與、合作共親職及家庭生活幸福感皆呈現顯著差異。四、家庭生活幸福感與父母參與、合作共親職呈現顯著正相關，可知當父母參與、合作共親職越多，學童知覺家庭生活幸福感的程度也會越高；而抵制共親職則與家庭生活幸福感呈現負相關。五、父母與學童之親密互動及父母彼此間的合作共親職對於學童知覺家庭生活幸福感皆具有正向的預測力，而抵制共親職則對於學童知覺家庭生活幸福感皆具有負向的預測力。    本研究最後根據研究結果，提出建議以供父母、相關實務工作者參考，並提供未來研究可進行的方向。
The objectives of this study were to investigate the perceptions of fifth and sixth graders of dual-Earner families on their parents’ involvement, coparenting, and the feeling of family life well-being. Furthermore, this study would like to explore the influence of parents’ involvement and coparenting on family life well-being in children.A self-report survey was distributed to nine Taipei County’s Public Elementary Schools’ fifth and sixth graders. The instruments included “the 「Parents’ Involvement Scales」、the「Coparenting Scale」、and the「Family-Life Well-being Scale」. Six hundred and thirty surveys were distributed and 421 valid questionnaires were collected. Data were analyzed by descriptive statistics, pair t-tests, One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVAs), Pearson Correlation, and Multiple Regressions. The results were summarized as follows：1.Fifth and sixth grader reported that they perceived both parents participated in 「parents - child intimate interaction」、「 daily activity assistance 」、and  「communication and support」 dimensions. However, comparing the average of the frequency of each dimension between maternal and paternal involvement, mothers showed significant greater participation in the parents’ involvement than the fathers did.2.Participants reported that they felt both parents support the coparenting system, less reported to recognize the “counter coparenting”. Besides, participants reported that the feelings of family life well-being were pretty high.3.The results showed that there were gender differences on the level of parents’ involvement. In addition, parents’ involvement, supporting coparenting, and the feelings of family life well-being were significantly related to family socio-economic status.4.There were positive relations among participants’ “feelings of family life well-being”, “Parents’ involvement”, and “Supporting coparenting” dimensions. It was known that more parents’ involvement and more supporting coparenting, the higher level of the feelings of family life well-being. Nevertheless, a negative relation between counter coparenting and the feelings of family life well-being was detected.5.Multiple regression results showed that family life well-being was positively affected by parent-child intimate interaction and the supportive coparenting between parents while negatively affected by the “counter coparenting .”Suggestions were proposed to the parents, practitioners. The directions for future research were also proposed.
