零售商模仿品對消費者混淆與購買意願之影響
The effects of retailers' lookalikes on consumers' confusion and purchase intention
自有品牌、模仿品、外觀相似度、主觀知識、價值意識、品牌聯想、混淆、知覺風險、購買意願
近年來，由於台灣市場上的零售業者競爭激烈，零售商為了增加獲利率，紛紛推出了其自行開發的自有品牌。然而零售業者發現其自有品牌因低成本而設計出來單調的包裝無法吸引到消費者的注意，因此業者開始仿效知名品牌的包裝特徵，此即為本研究所稱之「模仿品」，模仿品大多遊走在法律邊緣，其品牌名稱並不會和知名品牌一樣，故不是仿冒品，但是模仿品的存在對知名品牌的品牌權益仍然可能會有所侵害。本研究採用調查法，由於市面上僅屈臣氏使用模仿策略較為明顯，因此本研究使用屈臣氏六個自有品牌之模仿品及其模仿標的為樣品，包括洗髮乳、沐浴乳、卸妝油、面膜等產品類，有效問卷共419份，並以LISREL 作為線性結構模式之分析工具。研究結果顯示本架構之整體適配度良好(NFI = 0.91、NNFI = 0.93、CFI = 0.94、GFI = 0.84、AGFI = 0.80、RMSEA = 0.072)。結果發現，消費者認知模仿品外觀相似度對於混淆程度有正面的影響，而價值意識、知名品牌聯想會對混淆有負面影響；知覺模仿品之屬性相似度、商店印象，則都會對模仿品之評價有正面的影響，進而正面影響模仿品的購買意願；而消費者所感知到模仿品的知覺風險，也會對購買意願產生負面的影響。此外消費者認知外觀的相似度與混淆程度，對於消費者知覺模仿品之屬性相似度的影響皆不顯著，其說明了消費者並不會因為外觀的相似，就完全推論屬性上也是相似。零售業者應該致力於提升自身的商店印象，才有助於自有品牌的銷售。
As the competition among retailers is getting serious in Taiwan’s, some retailers issue their private brands in order to increase profits. However, some retailers realize that the low-cost, simple packages of the private brands cannot attract consumers’ attention efficiently, thus, some retailers begin to imitate the packages of national brands. These private brands are called “lookalikes” in this research. Lookalikes are not the same as “pirated goods”, which always have the same name as famous brands. Looalikes always lie in the edge of illegality.      In this research, we want to explore the effects of lookalikes on consumers’ purchase intentions and other constructs. We conducted a survey and took Watsons as our research background. In our study, there are six Watsons’ private brand products and six famous brand products which are imitated, including shampoos, shower gel, cosmetics mask, cleaner oil and so on. The valid samples are 419 respondents and we use LISREL to analyze structural equation modeling. The goodness of fit index is good enough (NFI = 0.91, NNFI = 0.93, CFI = 0.94, GFI = 0.84, AGFI = 0.80, RMSEA = 0.072). The results show that the similarity between lookalikes and famous brands has a positive effect on consumers’ confusion, value consciousness and the brand associations have a negative effect on consumers’ confusion. Furthermore, the similarities of attributes between lookalikes and famous brands, as well as store images have positive effects on the evaluation of lookalikes and purchase intention. However, perceived risk has a negative effect on purchase intention.      The results also demonstrate that consumers’ subjective knowledge does not have a significant effect on consumers’ confusion. Besides, the similarity between lookalikes and famous brands and consumers’ confusion do not have significant effects on the similarity of attribute between lookalikes and famous brands. It shows that consumers may not conclude that two products have the same performance from the similarity of packages between two products. That is, the strategy of lookalikes does not work well. In conclusion, in order to increase the sales of private brands, retailers should try their best to improve their store images.
