電話詐欺犯罪特性之研究－以台北縣為例
The Research of Telephone Fraud Crime Characteristics—A Case Study of Taipei County
電話詐欺、詐欺犯罪特性、轉帳、詐騙集團

論文摘要內容：自民國92年以後，有組織的跨國境詐騙集團儼然成形，大量使用人頭帳戶及電話，結合金融機構ATM轉帳服務，虛編各項名義、配合時事，來欺騙社會大眾。根據刑事警察局的統計數據顯示，自民國92年至94年間所發生的詐欺案件數暴增了一倍之多，顯見其嚴重性，成為內政治安之一大隱憂。故積極查緝並瓦解不法詐騙集團，有效預防社會大眾持續受害，實為一重要之研究課題。本文將以統計分析方法，深入剖析新興詐騙集團之成員、被害人及犯罪相關之特性。本文以台北縣政府警察局，自民國92至94年3月間，所破獲之電話詐欺案件的犯罪嫌疑人及被害人為研究對象。採用次數分配、獨立性檢定、關聯分析、自動互動檢視法、分類與迴歸樹狀法等方法，分析電話詐欺之犯罪人、被害者、犯罪模式及破案相關資料等變數，了解犯罪人及被害者之人格特質、習性、犯罪誘因、分工情形、被害原因、報案行為等，進一步提供執法人員就本類案件之各個面向，有更深入的掌握。本研究從新興電話詐欺案件之犯罪人、被害者及偵查人員等三方面著手，以不同的角度切入電話詐欺犯罪問題的核心，並套用現代交通安全「三E政策」的管理原則，提出執行、工程與教育等三個層面的偵防策略，以達治標，而後治本的目的。
After 2003, the organized and transnational syndicate of deception has been established. They not only use a large amount of people account and telephone, but also combine the financial institution ATM transfer service at the same time, to cheat the people by any sham reasons even cooperate with current events. According to statistics of the criminal police office, the deception cases taken place have increased one the amount of time suddenly among 2003 to 2005. Obviously, it is a serious problem and also affect by the depressed situation of Taiwan economy, the new developing telephone to deceive case certainly will appear more and more rampant future and become one great cause to attack the internal public security. Therefore, investigate and seize actively to disintegrate the deception group, and effectively prevent the people from being duped become an important subject for research. This text will analyze the related characteristic of member, sufferer and crime of swindling the group by the statistic analysis method.The object of this study is suspects and sufferers of the telephone deceive cases, which were solved by all police departments of Taipei country government police office during 2003 to march of 2005. Using the frequency distribution, test independent, association analysis, CHAID, C&RT, to analyze the variable of crime people, sufferer, criminal mode and solve a case relevant materials, and so as to find out the personality character, habits, crime inducement, the situation of diving work, the injured reason of this kind of crime people and sufferer, enable the enforced officer can master more well in this kind case.This study analysis from three aspects crime people, sufferer, and investigator of the new developing telephone to deceive case, with different points of view to discuss the core of criminal problems. Furthermore, imitating completely ' three E policy ' the management principle of the modern traffic safety, and carrying out three aspects of investigating and preventing strategy, to get the end purpose of preventing crime from enforcement, construction, and education aspect.
