非常態資料遺失值插補法之研究
A Study of Imputation Methods on nonnormal Data
Box-Cox轉換、遺失值、平均值穩健估計法、插補法
統計上處理遺失值的問題時，最常使用的方法就是插補法（imputation），插補法的基本概念為一旦出現遺失值時，則找尋一個數值替代遺失值，但每種插補法有其限制，不能隨意取用。目前的插補法有很多種，不過所有插補法的共通目的就是找一個合理的數值取代遺失值。在本論文以中華民國93年來台旅客消費及動向調查報告為例並使用消費金額變項作插補分析，在插補方法上選擇使用迴歸插補法、EM插補法與熱卡插補法。另一方面，消費金額為非常態資料，因此在進行EM插補法與迴歸插補法時，則使用Box-Cox轉換，提供一近似常態分配轉換之插補方式，而熱卡插補法並不需要有嚴謹的假設，因此不進行任何轉換便可插補。最後，則是估計具有代表性之平均數，在此並以估計來台旅客每人每日消費總金額為例進行分析。一般而言，找出具代表性之平均數，大多數文獻都建議透過變數轉換使連續變數呈現常態分配，即可求得具代表性之平均數，而在本研究中，由於無法透過Box-Cox轉換，使消費金額呈現常態分配，因此本研究經考慮使用Lee & Huang (2003) 所推導之平均值穩健估計方法，找出代表性之平均數。
In statistics, imputation is the most often applied method in solving the problem of missing value. The basic concept of imputation is that with the emergence of a missing value, a value is sought to replace it. All imputations have their limitations, and they cannot be applied at will. There are many kinds of imputations used in the field of statistics, and their common goal is to find a reasonable value to replace missing value.In this thesis, the analysis of imputation is conducted based on the variable of consumption and with the report on the consumption and trend of the foreign travelers visiting Taiwan in 2004 as an explicative example. Regression imputation, EM imputation and Hot deck imputation are chosenin the application of imputations. On the other hand, the sum of the travelers’ consumption is non-normal data, so Box-Cox transformaton is used when I do the EM imputation and Regression imputation to provide an imputation method that resembles normal distribution transformation. Hot deck imputation does not require strict hypothesis, and imputation can be carried out without any transformations.Finally, a representative mean is evaluated, and an analysis is carried out based on the total sum of money spent by travelers per person and per day. In general, most literature reviews suggest that, in looking for a representative mean, one just need to make continuous variable appear in the form of normal allocation through variable transformation. In this thesis, the sum of consumption cannot be made to appear in the form of normal allocation through Box-Cox transformation, and I, after serious consideration, has chosen to use the mean of robust estimates introduced and developed by Lee & Huang (2003) to find out the representative mean.
