非金融機構市場風險管理
Corporate Market Risk Management
公司矩陣、盈餘風險值、現金流量風險值、衍生性金融工具
近幾年，隨著全球資訊的發達與交通的便捷，全世界的各個產業不斷的往外擴展，企業面臨的風險種類增加。雖然過去企業已經開始管理風險，但僅限於利用傳統敏感性分析法來衡量公司所面臨之風險。然而由於僅對單一風險來源去考慮其變動之影響，無法加總不同型式之風險，使得不同種類資產間的風險無法進行比較。當時VaR的觀念已經提出，有許多人試著將風險值觀念應用在非金融企業，但由於VaR僅考慮短期投資組合價值的變動，非金融企業重視的卻是長期盈餘與現金流量波動的風險，因而造成VaR並不適用於非金融企業。在此情況下，許多學者便紛紛提出公司風險管理之觀念，但卻沒有一個具體而又明確的方法衡量非金融企業之風險，因此在企業迫切需要下，J.P. Morgan提出公司矩陣(CorporateMetrics)模型與觀念，有助於公司現金流量與盈餘風險管理，有效幫助企業量化市場風險。    公司矩陣主要在衡量企業組織在總體環境下，當市場風險因子（如：利率、匯率等）變動所導致財務結果（如：盈餘、現金流量等）變動之風險。公司矩陣主要分為五個步驟：一為風險衡量指標，即決定企業所面臨的市場風險因子與財務結果。二為描繪曝顯函數，即將市場風險如何影響公司財務結果以方程式或數學式表示。三為情境模擬。四為評價風險標的。五為計算風險。本研究將公司矩陣裡每一步驟簡明分析，讓公司了解如何衡量其未來財務結果(現金流量、盈餘)在市場因子的變動下之最大可能損失，並提供公司針對未來的預算規劃進行風險控管的指南，以提高股東價值與績效，並且介紹公司避險方法與工具，以利企業進行風險管理。
In recent years, because of the growing trend of globalization, the variety and severity of risks that corporates face are on the rise. Although managing market risk and credit risk is by no means a new task, it used to be limited to sensitive analysis of individual risks and hence, was not capital of estimating the total risk faced by corporates, since it dealt with how market rates affect corporate variables one at a time. The application of VaR in the second half of 1990s by financial institutions to measure the potential effect of market risk on the market values of their portfolios has raised the interest of many industrial companies in applying the VaR methodology to the corporate environment. While industrial companies’ management focuses on shareholder value creation and on key corporate financial results such as earnings and cash flows, VaR attempts to capture the short-term market value fluctuation and, therefore, is not quite suitable for non-financial institutions to measure their market risks. In 1997, J.P.Morgan published the CorporateMetrics  which offers a new way for corporates to measure their market risks.    CorporateMetrics  model involves five steps. Step 1 is metrics specification which specifies the types of financial results for which risks are to be measured. Step 2 is exposure mapping which identifies the relationship between financial results and market rates. Step 3 is scenario generation which generates the market rate distributions. Step 4 is valuation which calculates the future financial results under each market rate scenario. Step 5 is risk measure which computes earnings at risk or cash flow at risk. This thesis provides an introduction to the model and discusses the details of performing each step with a hope that it can help corporates to measure and manage market risk to increase shareholder value.
