韓國泡菜的飲食文化與營養保健之綜論研究
The Review Studies on Culture and Health Aspects of Kimchi
韓國泡菜、飲食文化、乳酸菌、類黃酮、大蒜、辣椒

隨著經濟進步及生活水準的提升，養生保健觀念日趨受到國人的重視，故韓國泡菜不僅因其口感獨特，且因其對人體具有卓越之生理功能，近年來在世界各地大放異彩而受到世人重視。故本綜論研究主要目的在收集統整韓國泡菜之營養成分和對人體之保健功能，及對韓國泡菜飲食文化層面的探討。過去韓國因位於較高緯度、天氣嚴寒，較缺乏新鮮蔬菜，所以於公元七世紀出現了醃製蔬菜產物-泡菜，從此也奠定了泡菜重要的地位。對現在的韓國而言，蔬菜一點都不匱乏，但泡菜已是韓國人生活中不可或缺的一個重要環節，韓國人每年平均吃掉18公斤泡菜，且對於這個祖先所傳承下來的智慧結晶深深引以為傲。許多流行病學研究及動物試驗結果均顯示攝取蔬果類可降低許多慢性疾病罹患率；這結果與蔬果中之植物化學物質有密切關係。植物化學物質為蔬果中之化學成分，具有許多生理功能。在植物中含量雖少，卻有調節人體生理作用之功能；植物化學物質包括大蒜中的有機硫化物，蕃茄及辣椒中的類胡蘿蔔素，辣椒中的類辣椒素、十字花科中之異硫氰酸酯化物及天然多酚類化合物如類黃酮等。韓國泡菜一般由白菜、白蘿蔔、辣椒、蒜、蔥、薑及海鮮所醃製而成，故韓國泡菜中除了含有大量的維生素C、脂肪、蛋白質、碳水化合物、礦物質、維生素A、B1、B2和乳酸菌，還有許多植物化學物質如有機硫化物、類胡蘿蔔素、類辣椒素、異硫氰酸酯化物及類黃酮，因此具有提升免疫功能、抗菌、減低發炎反應、抗氧化、調節腸胃功能、降膽固醇、抗血栓、抗過敏及抗癌之作用。綜合上述，韓國泡菜具有提供獨特的飲食文化背景與生理活性功能。
As the development of economy and the progress of living standard, health management has been deeply emphasized by people in Taiwan. Because of the unique taste and the extraordinary beneficial effects on health, people put much emphasis on kimchi, a kind of pickled vegetables in Korea, The review thesis was aimed to collect and integrate the data of the nutrients and biological functions on kimchi, and investigate the dietary culture of kimchi. During the cold winter season in Korea, cultivation was practically impossible, which directly led to the development of a storage method pickling. Being a kind of pickled vegetables, kimchi, was born around the 7th century in Korea. As a result, kimchi establishes an important role in Korean dietary culture. Even vegetables are sufficient in Korea now. Each of Korean consumes kimchi about 18 Kg per year. And Korean people are very proud of this wisdom of their ancestors who delivered this kind of food custom. There was abundant evidence from epidemiological studies and in vivo experiments that higher intake from vegetables and fruit was associated with decreased risk for chronic disease. It was associated with phytochemicals, which naturally occur in vegetables and fruit. They are not usually required for normal functioning of the body nonetheless that have a beneficial effect on health. Phytochemicals include organosulphur compounds in Alliaceae such as garlic, carotenoids in carrots and chili peppers, capsacinoids in chili peppers, isoflavones in soybeans, and isothiocyanates in Cruciferae and polyphenol compounds such as flavonoids. Kimchi has been scientifically proved to be highly nutritious. Common ingredients in kimchi include Chinese cabbage, radish, chili powder, garlic, spring onion, ginger, squid, oyster or other seafood, and salt. The studies have found that kimchi contains a surprisingly large amount of vitamin C, proteins, fats, carbohydrates, minerals, vitamin A, B1, B2, as well as substantial amounts of phytochemicals such as flavonoids, organosulfur compounds, carotenoids, isothiocyanates, capsaicinoids. Lactobacilli are heavily involved in the fermentation of kimchi. Substances in kimchi may promote the functions of the immune system and gastrointestinal system, act directly against bacteria and viruses, reduce inflammation and cholesterol. Besides, kimchi is associated with the treatment and/or prevention of cancer, and has antioxidant, anti-thrombosis and anti-allergic functions. In conclusion, there are special background of dietary culture on Kimchi and lots of biological functions for humans, so it is worth to uptake.
