體育場志工參與行為與參與態度之研究-以臺北縣立板橋體育場為例
The Correlation Study of Athletic Volunteers’ Participative Behavior and Participative Attitude--- A Case Study of Pan-Chiao Stadium
體育場、志工、參與態度
摘要本研究以台北縣立板橋體育場為研究對象，主要探討體育場志工在人口統計變項、參與行為及參與態度之差異情形。首先分析不同人口統計變項之志工對參與態度之差異；其次分析參與行為對參與態度之差異。本研究採問卷調查法，普查板橋體育場之84位志工。根據實際調查所得資料，以描述性統計、卡方檢定、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、雪費事後比較等統計方法進行資料分析得以下結論：一、板橋體育場志工的女性比例高於男性，年齡集中在46-50歲，已婚無未成年子女佔多數，教育程度國中以下較多，職業以家庭主婦比例較多，不是體育相關科系畢業佔多數 。二、體育場志工參與行為中工作性質以服務志工為多數，排班方式以固定班佔比例較高，服務年資以一以上未滿三年為多數，服務情形中以場方有特別活動也會支援佔多數，參與服務的頻率每月3-5次為最多，大部份志工未曾擔任過幹部，是否續任方面以願意續任佔絕對多數。三、不同「排班方式」及「參與頻率」對參與態度呈顯著差異，固定班顯著高於機動班；每月服務3-5次顯著高於每月服務1-2次，不同人口統計變項對參與態度皆無顯著差異。四、男性志工在「擔任過幹部」中的百分比較高；41-45歲志工在「擔任過幹部」中的百分比較高；國中以下及研究所以上的志工在每月服務1-2次的百分比較高，高中的志工在每月服務3-5次的百分比較高；職業為「工」的志工參與機動班的百分比較高；「公、教、學生、退休人員」及「工」的志工在每月服務1-2次的百分比較高，家庭主婦的志工在每月服務3-5次的百分比較高。關鍵詞：體育場、志工、參與態度論文總頁數：163
AbstractThe purpose of this study was in the light of the variations among demographic variables, participative behavior, and participative attitude for athletic volunteers’ of Pan-Chiao Stadium.  Firstly, it tried to analyze the variations for volunteers’ participative attitude under different demographic variables.  Then it tried to analyze variations between volunteers’ participative behavior and their participative attitude.This study was based on questionnaires filled out by 84 volunteers from Pan-Chiao Stadium.  According to the research data, this case study was concluded as following through descriptive statistics, Chi-square Test, t test, one-way ANOVA, and Scheff’s Method1.  Demographically, the ratio of female volunteers was higher than male volunteers; their average age was between 46 ~ 50 years old; most of them were married and having adult children; their average level of education was under junior high school; housewives were in the majority in them; and most of them were not graduated from physical-related education.2.  Behaviorally, the volunteers’ main character was service volunteer; most of them had fixed service schedule; their qualification for volunteer was generally between 1 ~ 3 years; most of them would support when there were special activities; they usually participated in the activities 3 ~ 5 times every month; most of them never served as cadre members; and they were generally willing to keep servicing.3.  Different service schedule and frequency of participation obviously affected volunteers’ participative attitude; they preferred fixed schedule to on call schedule; they normally serviced 3 ~ 5 times every month other than 1 ~ 2 times every month; and different demographic variables would not apparently affect their participative attitude.4.  The ratio of male volunteers served as cadre members was higher than female volunteers; their average age was between 41 ~ 45 years old; the volunteers whose level of education was under junior high school or graduate school generally serviced 1 ~ 2 times every month; the volunteers whose level of education was senior high school generally serviced 3 ~ 5 times every month; volunteers whose career were laborers would be more willing to be on call schedule; volunteers whose career were public employees, teachers, students, retired personnel, and laborers usually serviced 1 ~ 2 times every month; housewives volunteers usually serviced 3 ~ 5 times every month.Key words stadium, volunteer, and participative attitudeTotal pages 163
