高中體育班學生次級文化研究-以臺北縣縣立高中為例
A study of student's sub-culture in PE classes of high schools-Taking Taipei County public high schools as examples
高中體育班、次級文化、價值觀、態度、生活型態

本研究目的在了解高中體育班學生的次級文化現況、背景因素方面的差異以及次級文化各層面之間的相關情形。以臺北縣縣立高中體育班277名學生為研究對象，以自編之「高中體育班學生次級文化調查問卷」為研究工具加以調查。所得資料以描述性統計、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析法以及皮爾森相關法等統計方法加以分析，得到結果如下：一、高中體育班學生的次級文化呈現正向積極態度。二、一般價值觀在「性別」因素方面，女性較重視「審美價值」；在「就讀學校」因素方面，不同學校的學生在「健康價值」方面有差異情形。三、運動參與價值觀在「就讀學校」因素方面，不同學校的學生在「增進運動專業能力」的態度上有差異情形；在整體運動價值觀方面，亦有差異情形。四、學習態度在「專長項目」因素有顯著差異，個人性質者在「專項練習態度」較團體性質者的態度積極；不同「就讀學校」的學生在「專項練習態度」上也有差異情形。五、對校態度除「年級」因素外，在其他背景因素方面具有顯著差異。女性在「對體育班態度」有負面看法；專長項目為個人性質者在「對教練態度」與整體對校態度方面，都較團體性質者認同；不同「就讀學校」的學生在「學校活動與設備」、「對師長態度」、「對體育班態度」與整體「對校態度」方面有顯著差異情形。六、未來展望在「專長項目」因素方面有顯著差異，個人性質者較清楚自己的「個人未來走向」。七、同儕人際關係在「性別」因素方面，女性的「人際交往」較正向；在「專長項目」因素方面，個人性質者較主動；「就讀學校」因素方面，在「人際觀念」、「人際交往」與整體「同儕人際關係」有顯著差異。八、休閒活動在「性別」因素方面有顯著差異，男性在「休閒活動取向」方面喜愛戶外、刺激的活動，也較女性重視休閒活動。九、高中體育班學生的次級文化各層面間有顯著相關。建議部份：一、強調「團體價值」；保持體育班經營政策。二、解決學生課業困境；提高對校認同感。三、加強升學資訊介紹；由正確人際觀念培養同儕人際關係；發展多元休閒活動。關鍵詞：高中體育班、次級文化、價值觀、態度、生活型態。論文總頁數：196
The purpose of the study was to understand the differences between the sub-culture and the background among the students in PE classes of the  high schools.  The researcher investigated 277 students in high schools in Taipei County with a self-made “ questionary about students’ sub-culture in PE classes of  high schools.”  Analyzing the information with descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, independent-samples t-test and Pearson’s correlation could get the result in the below.1.  Students’ sub-culture in PE classes of  high schools tended to be positive.2.  According to the general values, the female paid much attention to “ the appreciation of the beauty ” in “gender” ,and students in different schools had odds about “the health values” among  “ studying schools.”3.  According to the values in athletic concernment between “ studying schools”, students in different schools had different attitude toward “promoting athletic specialty.”  Besides, there were odds about the whole athletic values.4.  Learning attitude was obviously different in “ special skills“. Personal attitude was more active than team work in “the attitude toward specialty training”, and the students in “ studying schools” had odds in “the attitude toward specialty training”, too.5.  The points of view about their schools had diversities in other background except ‘the grades.”  The female thought negatively in “the attitude toward the PE class.”  As to the speciality, personal character tended to be more positive in “the attitude toward coaches “ and the points of view about their schools than the team work.  The students in different “ studying schools” had obvious differences in “school activities and equipment”, “the attitude toward teachers”, “the attitude toward the PE classes”, and the entire points of view about their schools.6.  The outlook for the future was obviously different in “ special skills, “ and “personal future tendency” was very clear in personal character.7.  According to the peer relationship in “gender”, the female’s “ acquaintanceship” was more positive ; personal character tended to be more active in “speciality” ; there were obvious differences between “relationship concept”, “ acquaintanceship” and the entire “peer relationship.”8.  The activities during leisure time was obviously different in “gender”.  As to ‘the tendency to the activities during leisure time”, the male enjoyed outdoor exciting activities, and they paid much more attention to it than the female.9.  Students’ sub-culture in PE classes of  high schools was conspicuously related in all aspects.Suggestion1.  Emphasize “team values”, and preserve the policies to administer PE classes.2.  Solve students’ schoolwork straits and raise the sense of the identification with their schools.3.  Reinforce the information to advance to higher schools; cultivate the peer relationship from the correct relationship concept, and develop multiple leisure activities.Key words PE classes of the high schools, sub-culture, values, attitude, life style .Total pages about the essay 196
