高濁度原水之粒徑分布及沉降性研究
Size Distribution and Settleability Of High Turbidity Particles In Water
最大允許誤差、濁度、沉降試驗、粒徑分布
本研究探討大漢溪上游石門水庫與其相關淨水廠入流原水之物理性質，並探討水中濁度量測調查方式與其靜置沉降可行性，所選定之水廠與高濁度原水來源為：(1)桃園縣大湳淨水廠，原水來源是由石門水庫集水區匯由桃園大圳所供應，(2)台北縣板新淨水廠，其原水來源則由鳶山堰供應。檢驗過程為採集濁度飆高時之原水進行總固體物、懸浮固體物、濁度、粒徑分析等物理性分析，建立兩目標原水各參數間之線性關係，以期作為高濁度原水處理之參考。    依據各水質檢測之最大允許誤差(Maximum Allowance Error,MAE)、相關水質試驗、Imhoff cones之SSC、量筒沉降試驗之結果，以期在實驗中將各檢驗步驟之誤差減至最低。並依據沉降試驗及粒徑分析結果，比較各流域高濁度原水粒徑組成的異同與不同濁度靜置沉降的去除效率，並藉由沉澱去除效率對各水域所產生的高濁度原水做出靜置沉降處理時間改善的建議。    有鑑於總固物物(TS)、懸浮固體物(SS)之試驗較為繁雜、耗時，且又需於實驗室中分析，方可獲得較精確之結果。而濁度(Nephelometric Turbidity Unit,NTU)及沉降試驗可於現場以濁度計及Imhoff cones之可沈降污泥濃度（Settleable Sediment Concentration,SSC）直接進行量測，因此，事先建立目標原水中濁度、SSC沉降試驗與TS及SS之關連性，可即時了解高濁度原水中微粒之物理性質，有助於淨水場選擇合適低濁度原水來源做後續淨水處理，以降低監測成本與提升處理效率。
This research investigated the analytical measurements and treatment methods of inflowing high turbidity water in drinking water treatment plants from the Da-Han River. Measurement uncertainty and gravitational settling efficiency were thoroughly discussed and evaluated. Raw waters were taken from (1)Da-Nan;(2)Ban-Sin water treatment plant. Linearity regression relationship between TS (Total Solids),SS (Suspended Solids),NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity Unit),size distribution, and settleable sediment concentration (SSC) were compared and assessed for the removing efficiency of the particles from high turbidity raw waters.  MAE (Maximum Allowance Error) was derived based upon independent errors of individual procedures in the analytical methods and experiments for the purpose of minimizing uncertainty throughout analyses, Imhoff and settleability experiments. Particle size distributions at various heights of measuring cylinder test suggested that gravitational settling removal efficiency of high turbidity raw water is only valid for particles sizes larger than 4 mm.  Because of time-consuming TS and SS tests, SSC measurements from Imhoff cones can enhance an immediate turbidity analysis and treatment evaluation for raw water situations. Investigation of the physical properties for high turbidity raw water may contribute to the understanding of the turbidity removing at water treatment plants for the purpose of reducing monitoring costs and raising drinking water treatment efficiency.
