高爾夫球場服務品質、顧客滿意度與消費行為關係之研究－美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部個案分析
A Study on the Relationship among Service Quality,Customer Satisfaction,and Consumer Behavior for Golf Club—A Case on the Miramar Golf Country Club.
高爾夫、服務品質、顧客滿意度、消費行為
本研究主要目的在瞭解美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部消費者之人口統計特徵及參與行為之分布情形；並比較不同人口統計特徵、參與行為之在感受服務品質變項間的差異情形；以及不同人口統計特徵、參與行為之美麗華消費者在顧客滿意度上的差異情形；消費者感受服務品質、顧客滿意度與消費行為之相關分析。本研究對象為228位至美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部之消費者，並採問卷調查方式在現場進行問卷調查。根據實際調查所得資料，以描述統計、項目分析、因素分析、單因子變異數分析等進行結果分析，所得結果如下：一、  美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部消費者，以男性人數居多，年齡多分布在41~50歲；職業為企業負責人且擁有大學學歷最多，每月平均收入多分部在50,001~80,000元之間；顧客以非會員為主體，每月平均下場打3~4次以上為最多，球齡大部分超過4~6年以上，差點多數為10~17在水準之上。二、  不同人口統計特徵、參與行為之美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部消費者在感受服務品質構面間有顯著差異，分別為年齡、教育程度、職業、參與的頻率、球齡、差點。三、  不同人口統計特徵、參與行為之美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部消費者在顧客滿意度上有顯著差異，分別為年齡、教育程度、職業、參與的頻率、球齡、差點。四、  美麗華高爾夫鄉村俱樂部消費者對服務品質感受程度及顧客滿意度有顯著相關；服務品質、顧客滿意度對消費行為也有正向影響。
The main purpose of this study is to comprehend the consumers’ population statistic characteristics and distributive situation of the participation behavior of the MIRAMAR golf country club, and compare the different situation of the service quality’s variational items, as well as the different situation of the MIRAMAR’S consumers on customer satisfaction,and related analysis of the experiences of consumers about the service quality、customer satisfaction and consuming behavior.      The objects of this study are 228 consumers of the MIRAMAR,and use the questionaries to make the field work. According to the obtainable informations, describing the statistics、analysis of item、analysis of element, to make the analysis of result, we acquire the following outcomes：1、  The consumers of MIRAMAR consist mostly of men. The range of age is 41-50 years old. The profession is the superintendent of enterprise and the majority have bachelor degrees, the average monthly income distributes over 50000-80000 NT dollars, the customers are mostly non-members. They averagely play 3-4 times per month. The history they play golf mostly over 4-6 years. The handicap is mostly 10-17 which is above the level.2、  The different population statistic characteristics and participation behavior of the MIRAMAR’S consumers think there are conspicuous differences on service quality, they are：age、educational background、profession、frequency of participation、history of playing golf and handicap.3、  The different population statistic characteristics and participation behavior of the MIRAMAR’S consumers think there are conspicuous differences on customer satisfaction, they are：age、educational background、profession、frequency of participation、history of playing golf and handicap.4、  The MIRAMAR’S consumers think that it’s relative about the service quality’s receptivity and customer satisfaction. There is positive effect for the service quality and customer satisfaction to the consuming behavior.
