高雄市國民中學九年一貫健康與體育學習領域課程實施現況及教師研習需求之研究
A Research of the Current Practice Condition of Grade 1-9 Health and Physical Education Curriculum and Study Requirement of Teachers at Junior High Schools in Kaohsiung City.
健康與體育領域、九年一貫課程、研習需求
摘要    本研究旨在瞭解高雄市國民中學九年一貫健康與體育學習領域教師實施課程現況，及教師參與研習需求。以高雄市九十四學年度擔任健康與體育學習領域教師為對象，研究方法為問卷調查法，採普測方式。問卷送出263份，回收有效問卷240份，有效回收率為91％。研究結果如下：一、高雄市國民中學九年一貫健康與體育學習領域課程實施現況（一）學校本位課程現況，配合學校整體環境規劃，由健康與體育領域教師共同研發，且根據教師專長去訂定發展項目。（二）課程統整現況，依據學校特色及資源規劃，課程統整使教學內容多元化、生活化，且展現教師專業、自主性及合作性。（三）資訊融入教學現況，教師使用文書處理製作作業單及學習單；數位教材運用方面，使用坊間編製的數位素材，僅五成的教師是自行設計或研發數位教材。（四）創意教學現況，教師教學創意自信高，亦屬於高創新教學行為。二、不同背景變項之高雄市國民中學教師對健康與體育學習領域課程實施現況之差異（一）學校課程本位實施現況，在性別、擔任職務、教師登記科別等      方面有顯著差異存在。（二）課程統整實施現況，在性別、教師登記科別、學校規模等方面      有顯著差異存在。（三）資訊融入實施現況，在服務年資方面有顯著差異存在。（四）創意教學實施現況，不同背景變項教師無顯著差異存在。三、高雄市國民中學教師對健康與體育學習領域研習需求現況（一）研習內容方面，以實務教學演示方面為主。（二）研習型態方面，以經驗交流型態取向為主。四、不同背景變項之高雄市國民中學教師對健康與體育學習領域研習需求實施現況之差異（一）研習內容方面，性別在理論教學方法內容有顯著差異存在。（二）研習型態方面，性別、教師登記科別及學校規模等方面有顯著      差異存在。
Abstract    The objective of the research is to investigate the current practice condition of Grade1-9 health and physical education curriculum and study requirement of teachers at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City.  It takes teachers of health and physical education in Kaohsiung City in the academic year of 2005 as research target and the research method is questionnaire survey, adopting general survey.   263 questionnaires were sent, and 240 were retrieved with 91% effective retrieve rate.  The result is as below1. Current practice condition of Grade1-9 health and physical education curriculum at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City.(1)  As for school-based curriculum, it’s developed by teachers of health and physical education by cooperating with the entire environment planning of the school and development items are decided pursuant to teachers’ specialties.(2)  As for curriculum integration, it’s planned according to school features and resources.  In teachers’ opinions, curriculum integration can make teaching activity be diverse, content of courses conform to real life, and show teachers’ specialties and autonomy, and promote cooperation ability of teachers.(3)  As for instruction infused by information technology, teachers use word processor to make assignment sheets and studying sheets, but regarding the application of digital teaching materials, they use materials from the street stalls and only 50% teachers design or develop digital teaching materials by themselves.(4)  As for innovative instruction, teachers, who have high confidence in originality of instruction, also belong to teachers with high innovative instruction behavior.2. Difference of current practice condition of health and physical education  curriculum of teachers from diverse background variables at junior high schools in  Kaohsiung City.(1) Current practice condition of school-based curriculum     As for gender, males are higher than females. Regarding position, directors are higher than preceptors. Teachers of physical education are higher than teachers of health education in the aspect of registered subject and there’s no outstanding difference in the residual aspects.(2) Current practice condition of curriculum integration      As for gender, males are higher than females. Teachers of physical education are higher than teachers of health education regarding registered subject.  Regarding school scale, the practice condition of teachers at school having less than 24 classes is higher than that of teachers at school having more than 60 classes, and there’s no outstanding difference in the residual aspects.(3) Current practice condition of information technology infusion      Regarding service seniority, teachers with less than 5 years seniority are higher than those with more than 21 years seniority.  Regarding school scale, the practice condition of teachers at school having less than 24 classes is higher than that of teachers at school having more than 60 classes, and there’s no outstanding difference in the residual aspects.(4) Current practice condition of innovative instruction    There’s no outstanding difference when teachers of diverse background variables carry out “innovative instruction.”3. The current condition of requirements for studying health and physical education of teachers at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City.(1)  Research and study contentTeachers of health and physical education studying field at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City take practical teaching display as the main research and study content.(2)  Research and study mode    Teachers of health and physical education studying field at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City focus on experience exchange mode regarding requirements for research and study mode.4. The current condition of requirements for studying “health and physical education studying field” of teachers from diverse background variables at junior high schools in Kaohsiung City.(1)  Research and study contentMale teachers have much higher requirements for theoretical teaching methods than those of female teachers and there’s no outstanding difference in the residual aspects.(2)  Research and study modeWith regard to requirements of traditional research and study mode, male teachers’ requirements are higher than those of female teachers and the requirements of teachers of physical education than those of teachers of health education.  Requirements of teachers at schools having less than 24 classes are higher than those of teachers at schools having more than 60 classes, and there’s no outstanding difference in the residual modes.
