點帶石斑抗黏液病毒與免疫球蛋白重鏈基因在胚胎期之表現
Expression of Epinephelus coioides Myxovirus Resistance (Mx) and Immunoglobulin M (IgM) heavy chain genes during developement
點帶石斑、神經壞死病毒、抗黏液病毒基因、免疫球蛋白重鏈基因、整體原位雜交法
魚類先天性免疫與後天性免疫反應保護作用，是防禦外源病原感染的基礎，為了研究石斑魚免疫相關基因在發育早期的表現，我們首先以石斑魚腦細胞株 (GB)進行神經壞死病毒之繁殖與純化，所得純化之神經壞死病毒顆粒進行紐西蘭大白兔免疫接種，製備出具有中和神經壞死病毒活性且高效價之多株抗體。抗神經壞死病毒多株抗體以被動免疫的方式稀釋2,000倍，浸泡中和沾黏在石斑魚受精卵卵鞘外之可能的感染源後，以RT-PCR追蹤受精卵以及孵化後之魚苗，證實無神經壞死病毒之感染後，培育魚苗作為研究材料，分析不同發育時期魚苗免疫基因之表現，本實驗室以點帶石斑Mx與IgM重鏈基因，分別做為先天性與後天性免疫基因標幟，並轉錄成Digoxigenin-UTP標定之RNA探針，進行整體原位雜交法；發現Mx基因轉錄在受精卵受精後第21 (孵化前)至受精後第39小時 (孵化後第一天後期)有訊號表現，表現位置在胸腺與前腎，但在受精後第51小時 (孵化後第二天前期)訊號下降，而在RT-PCR的檢測中，則發現在受精後第5小時即可表現；IgM重鏈基因轉錄在受精卵受精後第21小時 (孵化前)至受精後第27小時 (孵化後第一天前期)，有訊號表現且位置在胸腺，但在受精後第39小時 (孵化後第一天後期)訊號下降，而RT-PCR檢測則在受精後第5小時偵測到表現。此結果表示石斑魚先天性與後天性免疫基因在早期受精卵孵化至幼苗時期在淋巴器官內已開始基因表現。
Fish innate and adaptive immunity is a protective mechanism to defense foreign pathogens infection. In order to study the grouper immune-related gene expression at early stage, we used GB (grouper brain) cells to propagate and purify the NNV (Nervous Necrosis Virus) viral particles. The immunization inoculation of NNV viral particles into New Zealand rabbits produced a high titer anti-NNV polyclonal antibody, with the ability of neutralizing virus. To investigate the feasibility of passive immunity, we dilute the antibody in 2,000 fold in sea water and soaked the grouper eggs for 1 hour to disinfect the possible pathogens like NNV which may adhere on the surface of egg sheath. RT-PCR was then performed to trace the eggs and hatched out larvae. The larvae which was confirmed without NNV infection were analyzed the immune gene transcripts by using Epinephelus cocoidies Mx and IgM-heavy chain gene as innate and adaptive immune marker gene,respectively. These 2 genes were than transcribed to Digoxigenin labeled RNA probes for whole-mount in situ hybridization. The transcription of Mx gene showed signal at 21 hpf to 39 hpf in thymus, head kidney, and decreased at 51 hpf . RT-PCR can also detect the signal at 5 hpf. IgM-Heavy chain gene was transcribed at 21 hpf to 27 hpf in thymus, and the signal decreased at 39 hpf. RT-PCR can also detect the signal at 5 hpf. These results indicate the grouper innate and adaptive immune genes are transcribed in lymphoid organ during embryo to early larva stage.
